And he had been dead how long?
Dr. Durand answered this.
I examined the body this morning at ten o clock. Death must have
taken place at least seven, and possibly ten hours previously.
H m, that fixes it at between midnight and 3 a.m.
Exactly, and Madame Renauld s evidence places it at after 2
a.m. which narrows the field still further. Death must have been
instantaneous, and naturally could not have been self inflicted.
Poirot nodded, and the commissary resumed:
Madame Renauld was hastily freed from the cords that bound her by
the horrified servants. She was in a terrible condition of weakness,
almost unconscious from the pain of her bonds. It appears that
two masked men entered the bedroom, gagged and bound her, whilst
forcibly abducting her husband. This we know at second hand from
the servants. On hearing the tragic news, she fell at once into an
alarming state of agitation. On arrival, Dr. Durand immediately
prescribed a sedative, and we have not yet been able to question
her. But without doubt she will awake more calm, and be equal to
bearing the strain of the interrogation.
The commissary paused.
And the inmates of the house, monsieur?
There is old Fran oise, the housekeeper, she lived for many years
with the former owners of the Villa Genevi ve. Then there are two
young girls, sisters, Denise and L onie Oulard. Their home is in
Merlinville, and they come of the most respectable parents. Then
there is the chauffeur whom M. Renauld brought over from England with
him, but he is away on a holiday. Finally there are Madame Renauld
and her son, M. Jack Renauld. He, too, is away from home at present.
Poirot bowed his head. M. Hautet spoke:
Marchaud!
The sergent de ville appeared.
Bring in the woman Fran oise.
The man saluted, and disappeared. In a moment or two, he returned,
escorting the frightened Fran oise.
You name is Fran oise Arrichet?
Yes, monsieur.
You have been a long time in service at the Villa Genevi ve?
Eleven years with Madame la Vicomtesse. Then when she sold the Villa
this spring, I consented to remain on with the English milor. Never
did I imagine
The magistrate cut her short.
Without doubt, without doubt. Now, Fran oise, in this matter of
the front door, whose business was it to fasten it at night?
Mine, monsieur. Always I saw to it myself.
And last night?
I fastened it as usual.
You are sure of that?
I swear it by the blessed saints, monsieur.
What time would that be?
The same time as usual, half past ten, monsieur.
What about the rest of the household, had they gone up to bed?
Madame had retired some time before. Denise and L onie went up
with me. Monsieur was still in his study.
Then, if any one unfastened the door afterwards, it must have been
M. Renauld himself?
Fran oise shrugged her broad shoulders.
What should he do that for? With robbers and assassins passing
every minute! A nice idea! Monsieur was not an imbecile. It is not
as though he had had to let cette dame out
The magistrate interrupted sharply:
Cette dame? What lady do you mean?
Why, the lady who came to see him.
Had a lady been to see him that evening?
But yes, monsieur and many other evenings as well.
Who was she? Did you know her?
A rather cunning look spread over the woman s face. How should
I know who it was? she grumbled. I did not let her in last night.
Aha! roared the examining magistrate, bringing his hand down with
a bang on the table. You would trifle with the police, would you? I
demand that you tell me at once the name of this woman who came to
visit M. Renauld in the evenings.
The police the police, grumbled Fran oise. Never did I think
that I should be mixed up with the police. But I know well enough
who she was. It was Madame Daubreuil.
The commissary uttered an exclamation, and leaned forward as though
in utter astonishment.
Madame Daubreuil from the Villa Marguerite just down the road?
That is what I said, monsieur. Oh, she is a pretty one,
cellela ! The old woman tossed her head scornfully.
Madame Daubreuil, murmured the commissary. Impossible.
Voil , grumbled Fran oise. That is all you get for telling
the truth.
Not at all, said the examining magistrate soothingly. We were
surprised, that is all. Madame Daubreuil then, and Monsieur Renauld,
they were he paused delicately. Eh? It was that without doubt?
How should I know? But what will you? Monsieur, he was milor
anglais tr s riche and Madame Daubreuil, she was poor, that
one and tr s chic for all that she lives so quietly with her
daughter. Not a doubt of it, she has had her history! She is no
longer young, but ma foi! I who speak to you have seen the men s
heads turn after her as she goes down the street. Besides lately,
she has had more money to spend all the town knows it. The little
economies, they are at an end. And Fran oise shook her head with
an air of unalterable certainty.
M. Hautet stroked his beard reflectively.
And Madame Renauld? he asked at length. How did she take
this friendship.
Fran oise shrugged her shoulders.
She was always most amiable most polite. One would say that
she suspected nothing. But all the same, is it not so, the heart
suffers, monsieur? Day by day, I have watched Madame grow paler and
thinner. She was not the same woman who arrived here a month ago.
Monsieur, too, has changed. He also has had his worries. One could
see that he was on the brink of a crisis of the nerves. And who
could wonder, with an affair conducted such a fashion? No reticence,
no discretion. Style anglais , without doubt!
I bounded indignantly in my seat, but the examining magistrate was
continuing his questions, undistracted by side issues.
You say that M. Renauld had not to let Madame Daubreuil out? Had
she left, then?
Yes, monsieur. I heard them come out of the study and go to the
door. Monsieur said good night, and shut the door after her.
What time was that?
About twenty five minutes after ten, monsieur.
Do you know when M. Renauld went to bed?
I heard him come up about ten minutes after we did. The stair
creaks so that one hears every one who goes up and down.
And that is all? You heard no sound of disturbance during the
night?
Nothing whatever, monsieur.
Which of the servants came down the first in the morning?
I did, monsieur. At once I saw the door swinging open.
What about the other downstairs windows, were they all fastened?
Every one of them. There was nothing suspicious or out of place
anywhere.
Good, Fran oise, you can go.
The old woman shuffled towards the door. On the threshold she
looked back.
I will tell you one thing, monsieur. That Madame Daubreuil she
is a bad one! Oh, yes, one woman knows about another. She is a bad
one, remember that. And, shaking her head sagely, Fran oise left
the room.
L onie Oulard, called the magistrate.
L onie appeared dissolved in tears, and inclined to be
hysterical. M. Hautet dealt with her adroitly. Her evidence was
mainly concerned with the discovery of her mistress gagged and
bound, of which she gave rather an exaggerated account. She, like
Fran oise, had heard nothing during the night.
Her sister, Denise, succeeded her. She agreed that her master had
changed greatly of late.
Every day he became more and more morose. He ate less. He was
always depressed. But Denise had her own theory. Without doubt
it was the Mafia he had on his track! Two masked men who else
could it be? A terrible society that!
It is, of course, possible, said the magistrate smoothly. Now,
my girl, was it you who admitted Madame Daubreuil to the house
last night?
Not last night, monsieur, the night before.
But Fran oise has just told us that Madame Daubreuil was here
last night?
No, monsieur. A lady did come to see M. Renauld last night,
but it was not Madame Daubreuil.
Surprised, the magistrate insisted, but the girl held firm. She
knew Madame Daubreuil perfectly by sight. This lady was dark also,
but shorter, and much younger. Nothing could shake her statement.
Had you ever seen this lady before?
Never, monsieur. And then the girl added diffidently: But I
think she was English.
English?
Yes, monsieur. She asked for M. Renauld in quite good French,
but the accent one can always tell it, n est ce pas ? Besides
when they came out of the study they were speaking in English.
Did you hear what they said? Could you understand it, I mean?
Me, I speak the English very well, said Denise with pride. The
lady was speaking too fast for me to catch what she said, but I
heard Monsieur s last words as he opened the door for her. She
paused, and then repeated carefully and laboriously:
Yeas yeas butt for Gaud s saike go nauw!
Yes, yes, but for God s sake go now! repeated the magistrate.
He dismissed Denise and, after a moment or two for consideration,
recalled Fran oise. To her he propounded the question as to whether
she had not made a mistake in fixing the night of Madame Daubreuil s
visit. Fran oise, however, proved unexpectedly obstinate. It was
last night that Madame Daubreuil had come. Without a doubt it was
she. Denise wished to make herself interesting, voil tout ! So
she had cooked up this fine tale about a strange lady. Airing her
knowledge of English too! Probably Monsieur had never spoken that
sentence in English at all, and even if he had, it proved nothing,
for Madame Daubreuil spoke English perfectly, and generally used
that language when talking to M. and Madame Renauld. You see,
M. Jack, the son of Monsieur, was usually here, and he spoke the
French very badly.
The magistrate did not insist. Instead he inquired about the
chauffeur, and learned that only yesterday, M. Renauld had declared
that he was not likely to use the car, and that Masters might just
as well take a holiday.
A perplexed frown was beginning to gather between Poirot s eyes.
What is it? I whispered.
He shook his head impatiently, and asked a question:
Pardon, M. Bex, but without doubt M. Renauld could drive the
car himself?
The commissary looked over at Fran oise, and the old woman replied
promptly:
No, Monsieur did not drive himself.
Poirot s frown deepened.
I wish you would tell me what is worrying you, I said impatiently.
See you not? In his letter M. Renauld speaks of sending the car
for me to Calais.
Perhaps he meant a hired car, I suggested.
Doubtless that is so. But why hire a car when you have one of
your own. Why choose yesterday to send away the chauffeur on
a holiday suddenly, at a moment s notice? Was it that for some
reason he wanted him out of the way before we arrived?
4
The Letter Signed Bella
Fran oise had left the room. The magistrate was drumming
thoughtfully on the table.
M. Bex, he said at length, here we have directly conflicting
testimony. Which are we to believe, Fran oise or Denise?
Denise, said the commissary decidedly. It was she who let the
visitor in. Fran oise is old and obstinate, and has evidently
taken a dislike to Madame Daubreuil. Besides, our own knowledge
tends to show that Renauld was entangled with another woman.
Tiens! cried M. Hautet. We have forgotten to inform M. Poirot
of that. He searched amongst the papers on the table, and finally
handed the one he was in search of to my friend. This letter,
M. Poirot, we found in the pocket of the dead man s overcoat.
Poirot took it and unfolded it. It was somewhat worn and crumbled,
and was written in English in a rather unformed hand:
My dearest one:
Why have you not written for so long? You do love me still, don t
you? Your letters lately have been so different, cold and strange,
and now this long silence. It makes me afraid. If you were to stop
loving me! But that s impossible what a silly kid I am always
imagining things! But if you did stop loving me, I don t know
what I should do kill myself perhaps! I couldn t live without you.
Sometimes I fancy another woman is coming between us. Let her look
out, that s all and you too! I d as soon kill you as let her have
you! I mean it.
But there, I m writing high flown nonsense. You love me, and I
love you yes, love you, love you, love you!
Your own adoring
BELLA.
There was no address or date. Poirot handed it back with a grave
face.
And the assumption is, M. le juge ?
The examining magistrate shrugged his shoulders.
Obviously M. Renauld was entangled with this Englishwoman Bella. He
comes over here, meets Madame Daubreuil, and starts an intrigue with
her. He cools off to the other, and she instantly suspects something.
This letter contains a distinct threat. M. Poirot, at first sight the
case seemed simplicity itself. Jealousy! The fact that M. Renauld
was stabbed in the back seemed to point distinctly to its being a
woman s crime.
Poirot nodded.
The stab in the back, yes but not the grave! That was laborious
work, hard work no woman dug that grave, monsieur. That was a
man s doing.
The commissary exclaimed excitedly: Yes, yes, you are right. We
did not think of that.
As I said, continued M. Hautet, at first sight the case seemed
simple, but the masked men, and the letter you received from
M. Renauld complicate matters. Here we seem to have an entirely
different set of circumstances, with no relationship between the
two. As regards the letter written to yourself, do you think it
is possible that it referred in any way to this Bella, and her
threats?
Poirot shook his head.
Hardly. A man like M. Renauld, who has led an adventurous life in
out of the way places, would not be likely to ask for protection
against a woman.
The examining magistrate nodded his head emphatically.
My view exactly. Then we must look for the explanation of the
letter
In Santiago, finished the commissary. I shall cable without delay
to the police in that city, requesting full details of the murdered
man s life out there, his love affairs, his business transactions,
his friendships, and any enmities he may have incurred. It will
be strange if, after that, we do not hold a clue to his mysterious
murder.
The commissary looked round for approval.
Excellent, said Poirot appreciatively.
His wife, too, may be able to give us a pointer, added the
magistrate.
You have found no other letters from this Bella amongst M. Renauld s
effects? asked Poirot.
No. Of course one of our first proceedings was to search through
his private papers in the study. We found nothing of interest,
however. All seemed square and above board. The only thing at all
out of the ordinary was his will. Here it is.
Poirot ran through the document.
So. A legacy of a thousand pounds to Mr. Stonor who is he,
by the way?
M. Renauld s secretary. He remained in England, but was over here
once or twice for a week end.
And everything else left unconditionally to his beloved wife,
Eloise. Simply drawn up, but perfectly legal. Witnessed by the two
servants, Denise and Fran oise. Nothing so very unusual about
that. He handed it back.
Perhaps, began Bex, you did not notice
The date? twinkled Poirot. But yes, I noticed it. A fortnight
ago. Possibly it marks his first intimation of danger. Many rich
men die intestate through never considering the likelihood of their
demise. But it is dangerous to draw conclusions prematurely. It
points, however, to his having a real liking and fondness for his
wife, in spite of his amorous intrigues.
Yes, said M. Hautet doubtfully. But it is possibly a little
unfair on his son, since it leaves him entirely dependent on his
mother. If she were to marry again, and her second husband obtained
an ascendancy over her, this boy might never touch a penny of his
father s money.
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
Man is a vain animal. M. Renauld figured to himself, without doubt,
that his widow would never marry again. As to the son, it may have
been a wise precaution to leave the money in his mother s hands.
The sons of rich men are proverbially wild.
It may be as you say. Now, M. Poirot, you would without doubt
like to visit the scene of the crime. I am sorry that the body has
been removed, but of course photographs have been taken from every
conceivable angle, and will be at your disposal as soon as they
are available.
I thank you, monsieur, for all your courtesy.
The commissary rose.
Come with me, monsieurs.
He opened the door, and bowed ceremoniously to Poirot to precede
him. Poirot, with equal politeness, drew back and bowed to the
commissary.
Monsieur.
Monsieur.
At last they got out into the hall.
That room there, it is the study, hein ? asked Poirot suddenly,
nodding towards the door opposite.
Yes. You would like to see it? He threw the door open as he spoke,
and we entered.
The room which M. Renauld had chosen for his own particular
use was small, but furnished with great taste and comfort. A
businesslike writing desk, with many pigeon holes, stood in the
window. Two large leather covered armchairs faced the fireplace,
and between them was a round table covered with the latest books
and magazines. Bookshelves lined two of the walls, and at the end
of the room opposite the window there was a handsome oak sideboard
with a tantalus on top. The curtains and porti re were of a soft
dull green, and the carpet matched them in tone.
Poirot stood a moment talking in the room, then he stepped forward,
passed his hand lightly over the backs of the leather chairs, picked
up a magazine from the table, and drew a finger gingerly over the
surface of the oak sideboard. His face expressed complete approval.
No dust? I asked, with a smile.
He beamed on me, appreciative of my knowledge of his peculiarities.
Not a particle, mon ami ! And for once, perhaps, it is a pity.
His sharp, birdlike eyes darted here and there.
Ah! he remarked suddenly, with an intonation of relief. The
hearth rug is crooked, and he bent down to straighten it.
Suddenly he uttered an exclamation and rose. In his hand he held
a small fragment of paper.
In France, as in England, he remarked, the domestics omit to
sweep under the mats!
Bex took the fragment from him, and I came closer to examine it.
You recognize it eh, Hastings?
I shook my head, puzzled and yet that particular shade of pink
paper was very familiar.
The commissary s mental processes were quicker than mine.
A fragment of a cheque, he exclaimed.
The piece of paper was roughly about two inches square. On it was
written in ink the word Duveen.
Bien , said Bex. This cheque was payable to, or drawn by,
one named Duveen.
The former, I fancy, said Poirot, for, if I am not mistaken,
the handwriting is that of M. Renauld.
That was soon established, by comparing it with a memorandum from
the desk.
Dear me, murmured the commissary, with a crestfallen air,
I really cannot imagine how I came to overlook this.
Poirot laughed.
The moral of that is, always look under the mats! My friend
Hastings here will tell you that anything in the least crooked is a
torment to me. As soon as I saw that the hearth rug was out of the
straight, I said to myself: Tiens! The leg of the chair caught
it in being pushed back. Possibly there may be something beneath
it which the good Fran oise overlooked.
Fran oise?
Or Denise, or L onie. Whoever did this room. Since there is no
dust, the room must have been done this morning. I reconstruct
the incident like this. Yesterday, possibly last night, M. Renauld
drew a cheque to the order of some one named Duveen. Afterwards it
was torn up, and scattered on the floor. This morning But M. Bex
was already pulling impatiently at the bell.
Fran oise answered it. Yes, there had been a lot of pieces of
paper on the floor. What had she done with them? Put them in the
kitchen stove of course! What else?
With a gesture of despair, Bex dismissed her. Then, his face
lightening, he ran to the desk. In a minute he was hunting through
the dead man s cheque book. Then he repeated his former gesture. The
last counterfoil was blank.
Courage! cried Poirot, clapping him on the back. Without doubt,
Madame Renauld will be able to tell us all about this mysterious
person named Duveen.
The commissary s face cleared. That is true. Let us proceed.
As we turned to leave the room, Poirot remarked casually: It was
here that M. Renauld received his guest last night, eh?
It was but how did you know?
By this . I found it on the back of the leather chair.
And he held up between his finger and thumb a long black hair a
woman s hair!
M. Bex took us out by the back of the house to where there was a
small shed leaning against the house. He produced a key from his
pocket and unlocked it.
The body is here. We moved it from the scene of the crime just
before you arrived, as the photographers had done with it.
He opened the door and we passed in. The murdered man lay on the
ground, with a sheet over him. M. Bex dexterously whipped off the
covering. Renauld was a man of medium height, slender and lithe in
figure. He looked about fifty years of age, and his dark hair was
plentifully streaked with grey. He was clean shaven with a long
thin nose, and eyes set rather close together, and his skin was
deeply bronzed, as that of a man who had spent most of his life
beneath tropical skies. His lips were drawn back from his teeth
and an expression of absolute amazement and terror was stamped on
the livid features.
One can see by his face that he was stabbed in the back, remarked
Poirot.
Very gently, he turned the dead man over. There, between the
shoulder blades, staining the light fawn overcoat, was a round dark
patch. In the middle of it there was a slit in the cloth. Poirot
examined it narrowly.
Have you any idea with what weapon the crime was committed?
It was left in the wound. The commissary reached down a large
glass jar. In it was a small object that looked to me more like
a paper knife than anything else. It had a black handle, and
a narrow shining blade. The whole thing was not more than ten
inches long. Poirot tested the discoloured point gingerly with his
finger tip.
Ma foi! but it is sharp! A nice easy little tool for murder!
Unfortunately, we could find no trace of fingerprints on it,
remarked Bex regretfully. The murderer must have worn gloves.
Of course he did, said Poirot contemptuously. Even in Santiago
they know enough for that. The veriest amateur of an English Mees
knows it thanks to the publicity the Bertillon system has been
given in the Press. All the same, it interests me very much that
there were no finger prints. It is so amazingly simple to leave the
finger prints of some one else! And then the police are happy. He
shook his head. I very much fear our criminal is not a man of
method either that or he was pressed for time. But we shall see.
He let the body fall back into its original position.
He wore only underclothes under his overcoat, I see, he remarked.
Yes, the examining magistrate thinks that is rather a curious
point.
At this minute there was a tap on the door which Bex had closed after
him. He strode forward and opened it. Fran oise was there. She
endeavoured to peep in with ghoulish curiosity.
Well, what is it? demanded Bex impatiently.
Madame. She sends a message that she is much recovered, and is
quite ready to receive the examining magistrate.
Good, said M. Bex briskly. Tell M. Hautet and say that we will
come at once.
Poirot lingered a moment, looking back towards the body. I thought
for a moment that he was going to apostrophize it, to declare
aloud his determination never to rest till he had discovered the
murderer. But when he spoke, it was tamely and awkwardly, and his
comment was ludicrously inappropriate to the solemnity of the moment.
He wore his overcoat very long, he said constrainedly.
5
Mrs. Renauld s Story
We found M. Hautet awaiting us in the hall, and we all proceeded
upstairs together, Fran oise marching ahead to show us the
way. Poirot went up in a zigzag fashion which puzzled me, until he
whispered with a grimace:
No wonder the servants heard M. Renauld mounting the stairs;
not a board of them but creaks fit to wake the dead!
At the head of the staircase, a small passage branched off.
The servants quarters, explained Bex.
We continued along a corridor, and Fran oise tapped on the last
door to the right of it.
A faint voice bade us enter, and we passed into a large sunny
apartment looking out towards the sea, which showed blue and
sparkling about a quarter of a mile distant.
On a couch, propped up with cushions, and attended by Dr. Durand,
lay a tall, striking looking woman. She was middle aged, and her
once dark hair was now almost entirely silvered, but the intense
vitality and strength of her personality would have made itself
felt anywhere. You knew at once that you were in the presence of
what the French call une maitresse femme .
She greeted us with a dignified inclination of the head.
Pray be seated, monsieurs.
We took chairs, and the magistrate s clerk established himself at
a round table.
I hope, madame, began M. Hautet, that it will not distress you
unduly to relate to us what occurred last night?
Not at all, monsieur. I know the value of time, if these scoundrelly
assassins are to be caught and punished.
Very well, madame. It will fatigue you less, I think, if I ask you
questions and you confine yourself to answering them. At what time
did you go to bed last night?
At half past nine, monsieur. I was tired.
And your husband?
About an hour later, I fancy.
Did he seem disturbed upset in any way?
No, not more than usual.
What happened then?
We slept. I was awakened by a hand being pressed over my mouth. I
tried to scream out, but the hand prevented me. There were two men
in the room. They were both masked.
Can you describe them at all, madame?
One was very tall, and had a long black beard, the other was short
and stout. His beard was reddish. They both wore hats pulled down
over their eyes.
H m, said the magistrate thoughtfully, too much beard, I fear.
You mean they were false?
Yes, madame. But continue your story.
It was the short man who was holding me. He forced a gag into my
mouth, and then bound me with rope hand and foot. The other man
was standing over my husband. He had caught up my little dagger
paper knife from the dressing table and was holding it with the
point just over his heart. When the short man had finished with
me, he joined the other, and they forced my husband to get up
and accompany them into the dressing room next door. I was nearly
fainting with terror, nevertheless I listened desperately.
They were speaking in too low a tone for me to hear what they
said. But I recognized the language, a bastard Spanish such
as is spoken in some parts of South America. They seemed to be
demanding something from my husband, and presently they grew angry,
and their voices rose a little. I think the tall man was speaking.
You know what we want! he said. The secret! Where is it? I do
not know what my husband answered, but the other replied fiercely:
You lie! We know you have it. Where are your keys?
Then I heard sounds of drawers being pulled out. There is a safe
on the wall of my husband s dressing room in which he always keeps a
fairly large amount of ready money. L onie tells me this has been
rifled and the money taken, but evidently what they were looking
for was not there, for presently I heard the tall man, with an oath,
command my husband to dress himself. Soon after that, I think some
noise in the house must have disturbed them, for they hustled my
husband out into my room only half dressed.
Pardon , interrupted Poirot, but is there then no other egress
from the dressing room?
No, monsieur, there is only the communicating door into my
room. They hurried my husband through, the short man in front, and
the tall man behind him with the dagger still in his hand. Paul
tried to break away to come to me. I saw his agonized eyes. He
turned to his captors. I must speak to her, he said. Then, coming
to the side of the bed, It is all right, Eloise, he said. Do
not be afraid. I shall return before morning. But, although he
tried to make his voice confident, I could see the terror in his
eyes. Then they hustled him out of the door, the tall man saying:
One sound and you are a dead man, remember.
After that, continued Mrs. Renauld, I must have fainted. The
next thing I recollect is L onie rubbing my wrists, and giving
me brandy.
Madame Renauld, said the magistrate, had you any idea what it
was for which the assassins were searching?
None whatever, monsieur.
Had you any knowledge that your husband feared something?
Yes. I had seen the change in him.
How long ago was that?
Mrs. Renauld reflected.
Ten days perhaps.
Not longer?
Possibly. I only noticed it then.
Did you question your husband at all as to the cause?
Once. He put me off evasively. Nevertheless, I was convinced that
he was suffering some terrible anxiety. However, since he evidently
wished to conceal the fact from me, I tried to pretend that I had
noticed nothing.
Were you aware that he had called in the services of a detective?
A detective? exclaimed Mrs. Renauld, very much surprised.
Yes, this gentleman M. Hercule Poirot. Poirot bowed. He arrived
today in response to a summons from your husband. And taking
the letter written by M. Renauld from his pocket he handed it to
the lady.
She read it with apparently genuine astonishment.
I had no idea of this. Evidently he was fully cognizant of the
danger.
Now, madame, I will beg of you to be frank with me. Is there any
incident in your husband s past life in South America which might
throw light on his murder?
Mrs. Renauld reflected deeply, but at last shook her head.
I can think of none. Certainly my husband had many enemies, people
he had got the better of in some way or another, but I can think of
no one distinctive case. I do not say there is no such incident only
that I am not aware of it.
The examining magistrate stroked his beard disconsolately.
And you can fix the time of this outrage?
Yes, I distinctly remember hearing the clock on the mantelpiece
strike two. She nodded towards an eight day travelling clock in
a leather case which stood in the centre of the chimney piece.
Poirot rose from his seat, scrutinized the clock carefully, and
nodded, satisfied.
And here too, exclaimed M. Bex, is a wrist watch, knocked off
the dressing table by the assassins, without doubt, and smashed to
atoms. Little did they know it would testify against them.
Gently he picked away the fragments of broken glass. Suddenly his
face changed to one of utter stupefaction.
Mon Dieu! he ejaculated.
What is it?
The hands of the watch point to seven o clock!
What? cried the examining magistrate, astonished.
But Poirot, deft as ever, took the broken trinket from the startled
commissary, and held it to his ear. Then he smiled.
The glass is broken, yes, but the watch itself is still going.
The explanation of the mystery was greeted with a relieved smile. But
the magistrate bethought him of another point.
But surely it is not seven o clock now?
No, said Poirot gently, it is a few minutes after five. Possibly
the watch gains, is that so, madame?
Mrs. Renauld was frowning perplexedly.
It does gain, she admitted, but I ve never known it to gain
quite so much as that.
With a gesture of impatience, the magistrate left the matter of
the watch and proceeded with his interrogatory.
Madame, the front door was found ajar. It seems almost certain
that the murderers entered that way, yet it has not been forced at
all. Can you suggest any explanation?
Possibly my husband went out for a stroll the last thing, and
forgot to latch it when he came in.
Is that a likely thing to happen?
Very. My husband was the most absent minded of men.
There was a slight frown on her brow as she spoke, as though this
trait in the dead man s character had at times vexed her.
There is one inference I think we might draw, remarked the
commissary suddenly. Since the men insisted on M. Renauld dressing
himself, it looks as though the place they were taking him to,
the place where the secret was concealed, lay some distance away.
The magistrate nodded.
Yes, far, and yet not too far, since he spoke of being back by
morning.
What times does the last train leave the station of
Merlinville? asked Poirot.
Eleven fifty one way, and 12:17 the other, but it is more probable
that they had a motor waiting.
Of course, agreed Poirot, looking somewhat crestfallen.
Indeed, that might be one way of tracing them, continued the
magistrate, brightening. A motor containing two foreigners is quite
likely to have been noticed. That is an excellent point, M. Bex.
He smiled to himself, and then, becoming grave once more, he said
to Mrs. Renauld:
There is another question. Do you know any one of the name of
Duveen ?
Duveen? Mrs. Renauld repeated, thoughtfully. No, for the moment,
I cannot say I do.
You have never heard your husband mention any one of that name?
Never.
Do you know any one whose Christian name is Bella?
He watched Mrs. Renauld narrowly as he spoke, seeking to surprise
any signs of anger or consciousness, but she merely shook her head
in quite a natural manner. He continued his questions.
Are you aware that your husband had a visitor last night?
Now he saw the red mount slightly in her cheeks, but she replied
composedly.
No, who was that?
A lady.
Indeed?
But for the moment the magistrate was content to say no more. It
seemed unlikely that Madame Daubreuil had any connection with
the crime, and he was anxious not to upset Mrs. Renauld more than
necessary.
He made a sign to the commissary, and the latter replied with a
nod. Then rising, he went across the room, and returned with the
glass jar we had seen in the outhouse in his hand. From this,
he took the dagger.
Madame, he said gently, do you recognize this?
She gave a little cry.
Yes, that is my little dagger. Then she saw the stained point,
and she drew back, her eyes widening with horror. Is that blood?
Yes, madame. Your husband was killed with this weapon. He removed
it hastily from sight. You are quite sure about it s being the
one that was on your dressing table last night?
Oh, yes. It was a present from my son. He was in the Air Force
during the War. He gave his age as older than it was. There was
a touch of the proud mother in her voice. This was made from
a streamline aeroplane wire, and was given to me by my son as a
souvenir of the War.
I see, madame. That brings us to another matter. Your son,
where is he now? It is necessary that he should be telegraphed to
without delay.
Jack? He is on his way to Buenos Ayres.
What?
Yes. My husband telegraphed to him yesterday. He had sent him on
business to Paris, but yesterday he discovered that it would be
necessary for him to proceed without delay to South America. There
was a boat leaving Cherbourg for Buenos Ayres last night, and he
wired him to catch it.
Have you any knowledge of what the business in Buenos Ayres was?
No, monsieur, I know nothing of its nature, but Buenos Ayres is
not my son s final destination. He was going overland from there
to Santiago.
And, in unison, the magistrate and the commissary exclaimed:
Santiago! Again Santiago!
It was at this moment, when we were all stunned by the mention of
that word, that Poirot approached Mrs. Renauld. He had been standing
by the window like a man lost in a dream, and I doubt if he had fully
taken in what had passed. He paused by the lady s side with a bow.
Pardon , madame, but may I examine your wrists.
Though slightly surprised at the request, Mrs. Renauld held them
out to him. Round each of them was a cruel red mark where the cords
had bitten into the flesh. As he examined them, I fancied that a
momentary flicker of excitement I had seen in his eyes disappeared.
They must cause you great pain, he said, and once more he looked
puzzled.
But the magistrate was speaking excitedly.
Young M. Renauld must be communicated with at once by wireless. It
is vital that we should know anything he can tell us about this
trip to Santiago. He hesitated. I hoped he might have been near
at hand, so that we could have saved you pain, madame. He paused.
You mean, she said in a low voice, the identification of my
husband s body?
The magistrate bowed his head.
I am a strong woman, monsieur. I can bear all that is required of
me. I am ready now.
Oh, tomorrow will be quite soon enough, I assure you
I prefer to get it over, she said in a low tone, a spasm of pain
crossing her face. If you will be so good as to give me your arm,
Doctor?
The doctor hastened forward, a cloak was thrown over Mrs. Renauld s
shoulders, and a slow procession went down the stairs. M. Bex
hurried on ahead to open the door of the shed. In a minute or
two Mrs. Renauld appeared in the doorway. She was very pale,
but resolute. Behind her, M. Hautet was clacking commiserations
and apologies like an animated hen.
She raised her hand to her face.
A moment, messieurs, while I steel myself.
She took her hand away and looked down at the dead man. Then the
marvellous self control which had upheld her so far deserted her.
Paul! she cried. Husband! Oh, God! And pitching forward she
fell unconscious to the ground.
Instantly Poirot was beside her, he raised the lid of her eye,
felt her pulse. When he had satisfied himself that she had really
fainted, he drew aside. He caught me by the arm.
I am an imbecile, my friend! If ever there was love and grief in
a woman s voice, I heard it then. My little idea was all wrong. Eh
bien! I must start again!
6
The Scene of the Crime
Between them, the doctor and M. Hautet carried the unconscious woman
into the house. The commissary looked after them, shaking his head.
Pauvre femme , he murmured to himself. The shock was too much
for her. Well, well, we can do nothing. Now, M. Poirot, shall we
visit the place where the crime was committed?
If you please, M. Bex.
We passed through the house, and out by the front door. Poirot
had looked up at the staircase in passing, and shook his head in
a dissatisfied manner.
It is to me incredible that the servants heard nothing. The
creaking of that staircase, with three people descending it,
would awaken the dead!
It was the middle of the night, remember. They were sound asleep
by then.
But Poirot continued to shake his head as though not fully accepting
the explanation. On the sweep of the drive, he paused, looking up
at the house.
What moved them in the first place to try if the front door were
open? It was a most unlikely thing that it should be. It was far
more probable that they should at once try to force a window.
But all the windows on the ground floor are barred with iron
shutters, objected the commissary.
Poirot pointed to a window on the first floor.
That is the window of the bedroom we have just come from, is it
not? And see there is a tree by which it would be the easiest
thing in the world to mount.
Possibly, admitted the other. But they could not have done so
without leaving footprints in the flower bed.
I saw the justice of his words. There were two large oval flower beds
planted with scarlet geraniums, one each side of the steps leading
up to the front door. The tree in question had its roots actually
at the back of the bed itself, and it would have been impossible
to reach it without stepping on the bed.
You see, continued the commissary, owing to the dry weather no
prints would show on the drive or paths; but, on the soft mould of
the flower bed, it would have been a very different affair.
Poirot went close to the bed and studied it attentively. As Bex had
said, the mould was perfectly smooth. There was not an indentation
on it anywhere.
Poirot nodded, as though convinced, and we turned away, but he
suddenly darted off and began examining the other flower bed.
M. Bex! he called. See here. Here are plenty of traces for you.
The commissary joined him and smiled.
My dear M. Poirot, those are without doubt the footprints of the
gardener s large hobnailed boots. In any case, it would have no
importance, since this side we have no tree, and consequently no
means of gaining access to the upper story.
True, said Poirot, evidently crestfallen. So you think these
footprints are of no importance?
Not the least in the world.
Then, to my utter astonishment, Poirot pronounced these words:
I do not agree with you. I have a little idea that these footprints
are the most important things we have seen yet.
M. Bex said nothing, merely shrugged his shoulders. He was far
too courteous to utter his real opinion.
Shall we proceed? he asked instead.
Certainly. I can investigate this matter of the footprints later,
said Poirot cheerfully.
Instead of following the drive down to the gate, M. Bex turned up a
path that branched off at right angles. It led, up a slight incline,
round to the right of the house, and was bordered on either side
by a kind of shrubbery. Suddenly it emerged into a little clearing
from which one obtained a view of the sea. A seat had been placed
here, and not far from it was a rather ramshackle shed. A few
steps further on, a neat line of small bushes marked the boundary
of the Villa grounds. M. Bex pushed his way through these and we
found ourselves on a wide stretch of open downs. I looked round,
and saw something that filled me with astonishment.
Why, this is a golf course, I cried.
Bex nodded.
The limits are not completed yet, he explained. It is hoped to
be able to open them sometime next month. It was some of the men
working on them who discovered the body early this morning.
I gave a gasp. A little to my left, where for the moment I had
overlooked it, was a long narrow pit, and by it, face downwards,
was the body of a man! For a moment, my heart gave a terrible leap,
and I had a wild fancy that the tragedy had been duplicated. But
the commissary dispelled my illusion by moving forward with a sharp
exclamation of annoyance:
What have my police been about? They had strict orders to allow
no one near the place without proper credentials!
The man on the ground turned his head over his shoulder.
But I have proper credentials, he remarked, and rose slowly to
his feet.
My dear M. Giraud, cried the commissary. I had no idea that you
had arrived, even. The examining magistrate has been awaiting you
with the utmost impatience.
As he spoke, I was scanning the new comer with the keenest
curiosity. The famous detective from the Paris S ret was familiar
to me by name, and I was extremely interested to see him in the
flesh. He was very tall, perhaps about thirty years of age, with
auburn hair and moustache, and a military carriage. There was a
trace of arrogance in his manner which showed that he was fully
alive to his own importance. Bex introduced us, presenting Poirot
as a colleague. A flicker of interest came into the detective s eye.
I know you by name, M. Poirot, he said. You cut quite a figure
in the old days, didn t you? But methods are very different now.
Crimes, though, are very much the same, remarked Poirot gently.
I saw at once that Giraud was prepared to be hostile. He resented
the other being associated with him, and I felt that if he came
across any clue of importance he would be more than likely to keep
it to himself.
The examining magistrate began Bex again. But Giraud interrupted
him rudely:
A fig for the examining magistrate! The light is the important
thing. For all practical purposes it will be gone in another
half hour or so. I know all about the case, and the people at the
house will do very well until tomorrow, but, if we re going to find
a clue to the murderers, here is the spot we shall find it. Is it
your police who have been trampling all over the place? I thought
they knew better nowadays.
Assuredly they do. The marks you complain of were made by the
workmen who discovered the body.
The other grunted disgustedly.
I can see the tracks where the three of them came through the
hedge but they were cunning. You can just recognize the centre
footmarks as those of M. Renauld, but those on either side have
been carefully obliterated. Not that there would really be much to
see anyway on this hard ground, but they weren t taking any chances.
The external sign, said Poirot. That is what you seek, eh?
The other detective stared.
Of course.
A very faint smile came to Poirot s lips. He seemed about to speak,
but checked himself. He bent down to where a spade was lying.
That s what the grave was dug with, right enough, said Giraud. But
you ll get nothing from it. It was Renauld s own spade, and the
man who used it wore gloves. Here they are. He gesticulated with
his foot to where two soiled earth stained gloves were lying. And
they re Renauld s too or at least his gardener s. I tell you,
the men who planned out this crime were taking no chances. The man
was stabbed with his own dagger, and would have been buried with
his own spade. They counted on leaving no traces! But I ll beat
them. There s always something ! And I mean to find it.
But Poirot was now apparently interested in something else, a short
discoloured piece of lead piping which lay beside the spade. He
touched it delicately with his finger.
And does this, too, belong to the murdered man? he asked, and
I thought I detected a subtle flavour of irony in the question.
Giraud shrugged his shoulders to indicate that he neither knew
nor cared.
May have been lying around here for weeks. Anyway, it doesn t
interest me.
I, on the contrary, find it very interesting, said Poirot sweetly.
I guessed that he was merely bent on annoying the Paris detective
and, if so, he succeeded. The other turned away rudely, remarking
that he had no time to waste, and bending down he resumed his minute
search of the ground.
Meanwhile Poirot, as though struck by a sudden idea, stepped back
over the boundary, and tried the door of the little shed.
That s locked, said Giraud over his shoulder. But it s only a
place where the gardener keeps his rubbish. The spade didn t come
from there, but from the toolshed up by the house.
Marvellous, murmured M. Bex, to me ecstatically. He has been
here but half an hour, and he already knows everything! What a
man! Undoubtedly Giraud is the greatest detective alive today.
Although I disliked the detective heartily, I nevertheless was
secretly impressed. Efficiency seemed to radiate from the man. I
could not help feeling that, so far, Poirot had not greatly
distinguished himself, and it vexed me. He seemed to be directing
his attention to all sorts of silly, puerile points that had nothing
to do with the case. Indeed, at this juncture, he suddenly asked:
M. Bex, tell me, I pray you, the meaning of this whitewashed line
that extends all round the grave. Is it a device of the police?
No, M. Poirot, it is an affair of the golf course. It shows that
there is here to be a bunkair, as you call it.
A bunkair? Poirot turned to me. That is the irregular hole filled
with sand and a bank at one side, is it not?
I concurred.
You do not play the golf, M. Poirot? inquired Bex.
I? Never! What a game! He became excited. Figure to yourself,
each hole it is of a different length. The obstacles, they are
not arranged mathematically. Even the greens are frequently up
one side! There is only one pleasing thing the how do you call
them? tee boxes! They, at least, are symmetrical.
I could not refrain from a laugh at the way the game appeared to
Poirot, and my little friend smiled at me affectionately, bearing
no malice. Then he asked:
But M. Renauld, without doubt he played the golf?
Yes, he was a keen golfer. It s mainly owing to him, and to his
large subscriptions, that this work is being carried forward. He
even had a say in the designing of it.
Poirot nodded thoughtfully.
Then he remarked:
It was not a very good choice they made of a spot to bury the
body? When the men began to dig up the ground, all would have
been discovered.
Exactly, cried Giraud triumphantly. And that proves that they
were strangers to the place. It s an excellent piece of indirect
evidence.
Yes, said Poirot doubtfully. No one who knew would bury a body
there unless unless they wanted it to be discovered. And that
is clearly absurd, is it not?
Giraud did not even trouble to reply.
Yes, said Poirot, in a somewhat dissatisfied voice.
Yes undoubtedly absurd!
7
The Mysterious Madame Daubreuil
As we retraced our steps to the house, M. Bex excused himself
for leaving us, explaining that he must immediately acquaint the
examining magistrate with the fact of Giraud s arrival. Giraud
himself had been obviously delighted when Poirot declared that he had
seen all he wanted. The last thing we observed, as we left the spot,
was Giraud, crawling about on all fours, with a thoroughness in his
search that I could not but admire. Poirot guessed my thoughts,
for as soon as we were alone he remarked ironically:
At last you have seen the detective you admire the human
foxhound! Is it not so, my friend?
At any rate, he s doing something, I said, with asperity. If
there s anything to find, he ll find it. Now you
Eh bien! I also have found something! A piece of lead piping.
Nonsense, Poirot. You know very well that s got nothing to do with
it. I meant little things traces that may lead us infallibly to
the murderers.
Mon ami , a clue of two feet long is every bit as valuable as
one measuring two millimetres! But it is the romantic idea that
all important clues must be infinitesimal! As to the piece of
lead piping having nothing to do with the crime, you say that
because Giraud told you so. No as I was about to interpose a
question we will say no more. Leave Giraud to his search, and me
to my ideas. The case seems straightforward enough and yet and
yet, mon ami , I am not satisfied! And do you know why? Because of
the wrist watch that is two hours fast. And then there are several
curious little points that do not seem to fit in. For instance,
if the object of the murderers was revenge, why did they not stab
Renauld in his sleep and have done with it?
They wanted the secret, I reminded him.
Poirot brushed a speck of dust from his sleeve with a dissatisfied
air.
Well, where is this secret ? Presumably some distance away,
since they wish him to dress himself. Yet he is found murdered
close at hand, almost within ear shot of the house. Then again,
it is pure chance that a weapon such as the dagger should be lying
about casually, ready to hand.
He paused frowning, and then went on:
Why did the servants hear nothing? Were they drugged? Was there
an accomplice and did that accomplice see to it that the front door
should remain open? I wonder if
He stopped abruptly. We had reached the drive in front of the
house. Suddenly he turned to me.
My friend, I am about to surprise you to please you! I have taken
your reproaches to heart! We will examine some footprints!
Where?
In that right hand bed yonder. M. Bex says that they are the
footmarks of the gardener. Let us see if that is so. See, he
approaches with his wheelbarrow.
Indeed an elderly man was just crossing the drive with a barrowful
of seedlings. Poirot called to him, and he set down the barrow and
came hobbling towards us.
You are going to ask him for one of his boots to compare with
the footmarks? I asked breathlessly. My faith in Poirot revived
a little. Since he said the footprints in this right hand bed were
important, presumably they were .
Exactly, said Poirot.
But won t he think it very odd?
He will not think about it at all.
We could say no more, for the old man had joined us.
You want me for something, monsieur?
Yes. You have been gardener here a long time, haven t you?
Twenty four years, monsieur.
And your name is ?
Auguste, monsieur.
I was admiring these magnificent geraniums. They are truly
superb. They have been planted long?
Some time, monsieur. But of course, to keep the beds looking smart,
one must keep bedding out a few new plants, and remove those that
are over, besides keeping the old blooms well picked off.
You put in some new plants yesterday, didn t you? Those in the
middle there, and in the other bed also?
Monsieur has a sharp eye. It takes always a day or so for them to
pick up. Yes, I put ten new plants in each bed last night. As
Monsieur doubtless knows, one should not put in plants when the
sun is hot.
Auguste was charmed with Poirot s interest, and was quite inclined
to be garrulous.
That is a splendid specimen there, said Poirot, pointing. Might
I perhaps have a cutting of it?
But certainly, monsieur. The old fellow stepped into the bed,
and carefully took a slip from the plant Poirot had admired.
Poirot was profuse in his thanks, and Auguste departed to his barrow.
You see? said Poirot with a smile, as he bent over the bed to
examine the indentation of the gardener s hobnailed boot. It is
quite simple.
I did not realize
That the foot would be inside the boot? You do not use your
excellent mental capacities sufficiently. Well, what of the
footmark?
I examined the bed carefully.
All the footmarks in the bed were made by the same boot, I said
at length after a careful study.
You think so? Eh bien , I agree with you, said Poirot.
He seemed quite uninterested, and as though he were thinking of
something else.
At any rate, I remarked, you will have one bee less in your
bonnet now.
Mon Dieu! But what an idiom! What does it mean?
What I meant was that now you will give up your interest in these
footmarks.
But to my surprise Poirot shook his head.
No, no, mon ami . At last I am on the right track. I am still
in the dark, but, as I hinted just now to M. Bex, these footmarks
are the most important and interesting things in the case! That
poor Giraud I should not be surprised if he took no notice of
them whatever.
At that moment, the front door opened, and M. Hautet and the
commissary came down the steps.
Ah, M. Poirot, we were coming to look for you, said the
magistrate. It is getting late, but I wish to pay a visit to Madame
Daubreuil. Without doubt she will be very much upset by M. Renauld s
death, and we may be fortunate enough to get a clue from her. The
secret that he did not confide to his wife, it is possible that
he may have told it to the woman whose love held him enslaved.
We know where our Samsons are weak, don t we?
I admired the picturesqueness of M. Hautet s language. I suspected
that the examining magistrate was by now thoroughly enjoying his
part in the mysterious drama.
Is M. Giraud not going to accompany us? asked Poirot.
M. Giraud has shown clearly that he prefers to conduct the case in
his own way, said M. Hautet dryly. One could see easily enough
that Giraud s cavalier treatment of the examining magistrate had
not prejudiced the latter in his favour. We said no more, but fell
into line. Poirot walked with the examining magistrate, and the
commissary and I followed a few paces behind.
There is no doubt that Fran oise s story is substantially correct,
he remarked to me in a confidential tone. I have been telephoning
headquarters. It seems that three times in the last six weeks that
is to say since the arrival of M. Renauld at Merlinville Madame
Daubreuil has paid a large sum in notes into her banking account.
Altogether the sum totals two hundred thousand francs!
Dear me, I said, considering, that must be something like four
thousand pounds!
Precisely. Yes, there can be no doubt that he was absolutely
infatuated. But it remains to be seen whether he confided his
secret to her. The examining magistrate is hopeful, but I hardly
share his views.
During this conversation we were walking down the lane towards the
fork in the road where our car had halted earlier in the afternoon,
and in another moment I realized that the Villa Marguerite, the
home of the mysterious Madame Daubreuil, was the small house from
which the beautiful girl had emerged.
She has lived here for many years, said the commissary, nodding
his head towards the house. Very quietly, very unobtrusively. She
seems to have no friends or relations other than the acquaintances
she has made in Merlinville. She never refers to the past, nor to
her husband. One does not even know if he is alive or dead. There is
a mystery about her, you comprehend. I nodded, my interest growing.
And the daughter? I ventured.
A truly beautiful young girl modest, devout, all that she should
be. One pities her, for, though she may know nothing of the past,
a man who wants to ask her hand in marriage must necessarily inform
himself, and then The commissary shrugged his shoulders cynically.
But it would not be her fault! I cried, with rising indignation.
No. But what will you? A man is particular about his wife s
antecedents.
I was prevented from further argument by our arrival at the
door. M. Hautet rang the bell. A few minutes elapsed, and then we
heard a footfall within, and the door was opened. On the threshold
stood my young goddess of that afternoon. When she saw us, the colour
left her cheeks, leaving her deathly white, and her eyes widened
with apprehension. There was no doubt about it, she was afraid!
Mademoiselle Daubreuil, said M. Hautet, sweeping off his hat,
we regret infinitely to disturb you, but the exigencies of the
Law you comprehend? My compliments to Madame your mother, and will
she have the goodness to grant me a few moments interview.
For a moment the girl stood motionless. Her left hand was pressed
to her side, as though to still the sudden unconquerable agitation
of her heart. But she mastered herself, and said in a low voice:
I will go and see. Please come inside.
She entered a room on the left of the hall, and we heard the low
murmur of her voice. And then another voice, much the same in
timbre, but with a slightly harder inflection behind its mellow
roundness said:
But certainly. Ask them to enter.
In another minute we were face to face with the mysterious Madame
Daubreuil.
She was not nearly so tall as her daughter, and the rounded curves
of her figure had all the grace of full maturity. Her hair, again
unlike her daughter s, was dark, and parted in the middle in
the madonna style. Her eyes, half hidden by the drooping lids,
were blue. There was a dimple in the round chin, and the half
parted lips seemed always to hover on the verge of a mysterious
smile. There was something almost exaggeratedly feminine about her,
at once yielding and seductive. Though very well preserved, she was
certainly no longer young, but her charm was of the quality which
is independent of age.
Standing there, in her black dress with the fresh white collar
and cuffs, her hands clasped together, she looked subtly appealing
and helpless.
You wished to see me, monsieur? she asked.
Yes, madame. M. Hautet cleared his throat. I am investigating
the death of M. Renauld. You have heard of it, no doubt?
She bowed her head without speaking. Her expression did not change.
We came to ask you whether you can er throw any light upon the
circumstances surrounding it?
I? The surprise of her tone was excellent.
Yes, madame. It would, perhaps, be better if we could speak to
you alone. He looked meaningly in the direction of the girl.
Madame Daubreuil turned to her.
Marthe, dear
But the girl shook her head.
No, maman , I will not go. I am not a child. I am twenty two. I
shall not go.
Madame Daubreuil turned back to the examining magistrate.
You see, monsieur.
I should prefer not to speak before Mademoiselle Daubreuil.
As my daughter says, she is not a child.
For a moment the magistrate hesitated, baffled.
Very well, madame, he said at last. Have it your own way. We
have reason to believe that you were in the habit of visiting the
dead man at his Villa in the evenings. Is that so?
The colour rose in the lady s pale cheeks, but she replied quietly:
I deny your right to ask me such a question!
Madame, we are investigating a murder.
Well, what of it? I had nothing to do with the murder.
Madame, we do not say that for a moment. But you knew the dead man
well. Did he ever confide in you as to any danger that threatened
him?
Never.
Did he ever mention his life in Santiago, and any enemies he may
have made there?
No.
Then you can give us no help at all?
I fear not. I really do not see why you should come to me. Cannot
his wife tell you what you want to know? Her voice held a slender
inflection of irony.
Madame Renauld has told us all she can.
Ah! said Madame Daubreuil. I wonder
You wonder what, madame?
Nothing.
The examining magistrate looked at her. He was aware that he was
fighting a duel, and that he had no mean antagonist.
You persist in your statement that M. Renauld confided nothing
in you?
Why should you think it likely that he should confide in me?
Because, madame, said M. Hautet, with calculated brutality. A
man tells to his mistress what he does not always tell to his wife.
Ah! she sprang forward. Her eyes flashed fire. Monsieur, you
insult me! And before my daughter! I can tell you nothing. Have
the goodness to leave my house!
The honours undoubtedly rested with the lady. We left the Villa
Marguerite like a shamefaced pack of schoolboys. The magistrate
muttered angry ejaculations to himself. Poirot seemed lost in
thought. Suddenly he came out of his reverie with a start, and
inquired of M. Hautet if there was a good hotel near at hand.
There is a small place, the Hotel des Bains, on this side of
town. A few hundred yards down the road. It will be handy for your
investigations. We shall see you in the morning then, I presume?
Yes, I thank you, M. Hautet.
With mutual civilities, we parted company, Poirot and I going towards
Merlinville, and the others returning to the Villa Genevi ve.
The French police system is very marvellous, said Poirot, looking
after them. The information they possess about every one s life,
down to the most commonplace detail, is extraordinary. Though he
has only been here a little over six weeks, they are perfectly well
acquainted with M. Renauld s tastes and pursuits, and at a moment s
notice they can produce information as to Madame Daubreuil s banking
account, and the sums that have lately been paid in! Undoubtedly
the dossier is a great institution. But what is that? He turned
sharply.
A figure was running hatless, down the road after us. It was
Marthe Daubreuil.
I beg your pardon, she cried breathlessly, as she reached us. I I
should not do this, I know. You must not tell my mother. But is it
true, what the people say, that M. Renauld called in a detective
before he died, and and that you are he?
Yes, mademoiselle, said Poirot gently. It is quite true. But
how did you learn it?
Fran oise told our Am lie, explained Marthe, with a blush.
Poirot made a grimace.
The secrecy, it is impossible in an affair of this kind! Not that
it matters. Well, mademoiselle, what is it you want to know?
The girl hesitated. She seemed longing, yet fearing, to speak. At
last, almost in a whisper, she asked:
Is any one suspected?
Poirot eyed her keenly.
Then he replied evasively:
Suspicion is in the air at present, mademoiselle.
Yes, I know but any one in particular?
Why do you want to know?
The girl seemed frightened by the question. All at once Poirot s
words about her earlier in the day recurred to me. The girl with
the anxious eyes!
M. Renauld was always very kind to me, she replied at last. It
is natural that I should be interested.
I see, said Poirot. Well, mademoiselle, suspicion at present is
hovering round two persons.
Two?
I could have sworn there was a note of surprise and relief in
her voice.
Their names are unknown, but they are presumed to be Chilians from
Santiago. And now, mademoiselle, you see what comes of being young
and beautiful! I have betrayed professional secrets for you!
The girl laughed merrily, and then, rather shyly, she thanked him.
I must run back now. Maman will miss me.
And she turned and ran back up the road, looking like a modern
Atalanta. I stared after her.
Mon ami , said Poirot, in his gentle ironical voice, is it that
we are to remain planted here all night just because you have seen
a beautiful young woman, and your head is in a whirl?
I laughed and apologized.
But she is beautiful, Poirot. Any one might be excused for being
bowled over by her.
Poirot groaned.
Mon Dieu! But it is that you have the susceptible heart!
Poirot, I said, do you remember after the Styles Case when
When you were in love with two charming women at once, and neither
of them were for you? Yes, I remember.
You consoled me by saying that perhaps some day we should hunt
together again, and that then
Eh bien?
Well, we are hunting together again, and I paused, and laughed
rather self consciously.
But to my surprise Poirot shook his head very earnestly.
Ah, mon ami , do not set your heart on Marthe Daubreuil. She is
not for you, that one! Take it from Papa Poirot!
Why, I cried, the commissary assured me that she was as good as
she is beautiful! A perfect angel!
Some of the greatest criminals I have known had the faces of
angels, remarked Poirot cheerfully. A malformation of the grey
cells may coincide quite easily with the face of a madonna.
Poirot, I cried, horrified, you cannot mean that you suspect an
innocent child like this!
Ta ta ta! Do not excite yourself! I have not said that I suspected
her. But you must admit that her anxiety to know about the case is
somewhat unusual.
For once, I see further than you do, I said. Her anxiety is not
for herself but for her mother.
My friend, said Poirot, as usual, you see nothing at all. Madame
Daubreuil is very well able to look after herself without her
daughter worrying about her. I admit I was teasing you just now,
but all the same I repeat what I said before. Do not set your
heart on that girl. She is not for you! I, Hercule Poirot, know
it. Sacr ! if only I could remember where I had seen that face!
What face? I asked, surprised. The daughter s?
No. The mother s.
Noting my surprise, he nodded emphatically.
But yes it is as I tell you. It was a long time ago, when I was
still with the Police in Belgium. I have never actually seen the
woman before, but I have seen her picture and in connection with
some case. I rather fancy
Yes?
I may be mistaken, but I rather fancy that it was a murder case!
8
An Unexpected Meeting
We were up at the Villa betimes next morning. The man on guard at
the gate did not bar our way this time. Instead, he respectfully
saluted us, and we passed on to the house. The maid L onie was
just coming down the stairs, and seemed not averse to the prospect
of a little conversation.
Poirot inquired after the health of Mrs. Renauld.
L onie shook her head.
She is terribly upset, la pauvre dame ! She will eat nothing but
nothing! And she is as pale as a ghost. It is heartrending to see
her. Ah, par exemple , it is not I who would grieve like that for
a man who had deceived me with another woman!
Poirot nodded sympathetically.
What you say is very just, but what will you? The heart of a woman
who loves will forgive many blows. Still, undoubtedly there must
have been many scenes of recrimination between them in the last
few months?
Again L onie shook her head.
Never, monsieur. Never have I heard Madame utter a word of
protest of reproach, even! She had the temper and disposition of
an angel quite different to Monsieur.
Monsieur Renauld had not the temper of an angel?
Far from it. When he enraged himself, the whole house knew of
it. The day that he quarrelled with M. Jack ma foi! they might
have been heard in the market place, they shouted so loud!
Indeed, said Poirot. And when did this quarrel take place?
Oh! it was just before M. Jack went to Paris. Almost he missed
his train. He came out of the library, and caught up his bag which
he had left in the hall. The automobile, it was being repaired,
and he had to run for the station. I was dusting the salon, and I
saw him pass, and his face was white white with two burning spots
of red. Ah, but he was angry!
L onie was enjoying her narrative thoroughly.
And the dispute, what was it about?
Ah, that I do not know, confessed L onie. It is true that
they shouted, but their voices were so loud and high, and they
spoke so fast, that only one well acquainted with English could
have comprehended. But Monsieur, he was like a thundercloud all
day! Impossible to please him!
The sound of a door shutting upstairs cut short L onie s loquacity.
And Fran oise who awaits me! she exclaimed, awakening to a tardy
remembrance of her duties. That old one, she always scolds.
One moment, mademoiselle. The examining magistrate, where is he?
They have gone out to look at the automobile in the garage. Monsieur
the commissary had some idea that it might have been used on the
night of the murder.
Quelle id e , murmured Poirot, as the girl disappeared.
You will go out and join them?
No, I shall await their return in the salon . It is cool there
on this hot morning.
This placid way of taking things did not quite commend itself to me.
If you don t mind I said, and hesitated.
Not in the least. You wish to investigate on your own account, eh?
Well, I d rather like to have a look at Giraud, if he s anywhere
about, and see what he s up to.
The human foxhound, murmured Poirot, as he leaned back in
a comfortable chair, and closed his eyes. By all means, my
friend. Au revoir.
I strolled out of the front door. It was certainly hot. I turned
up the path we had taken the day before. I had a mind to study
the scene of the crime myself. I did not go directly to the spot,
however, but turned aside into the bushes, so as to come out on the
links some hundred yards or so further to the right. If Giraud were
still on the spot, I wanted to observe his methods before he knew
of my presence. But the shrubbery here was much denser, and I had
quite a struggle to force my way through. When I emerged at last on
the course, it was quite unexpectedly and with such vigour that I
cannoned heavily into a young lady who had been standing with her
back to the plantation.
She not unnaturally gave a suppressed shriek, but I, too, uttered
an exclamation of surprise. For it was my friend of the train,
Cinderella!
The surprise was mutual.
You, we both exclaimed simultaneously.
The young lady recovered herself first.
My only Aunt! she exclaimed. What are you doing here?
For the matter of that, what are you? I retorted.
When last I saw you, the day before yesterday, you were trotting
home to England like a good little boy. Have they given you a
season ticket to and fro, on the strength of your M.P.?
I ignored the end of the speech.
When last I saw you, I said, you were trotting home with your
sister, like a good little girl. By the way, how is your sister?
A flash of white teeth rewarded me.
How kind of you to ask! My sister is well, I thank you.
She is here with you?
She remained in town, said the minx with dignity.
I don t believe you ve got a sister, I laughed. If you have,
her name is Harris!
Do you remember mine? she asked, with a smile.
Cinderella. But you re going to tell me the real one now, aren t
you?
She shook her head with a wicked look.
Not even why you re here?
Oh, that! I suppose you ve heard of members of my profession
resting.
At expensive French watering places?
Dirt cheap if you know where to go.
I eyed her keenly.
Still, you d no intention of coming here when I met you two
days ago?
We all have our disappointments, said Miss Cinderella
sententiously. There now, I ve told you quite as much as is good
for you. Little boys should not be inquisitive. You ve not yet
told me what you re doing here? Got the M.P. in tow, I suppose,
doing the gay boy on the beach.
I shook my head. Guess again. You remember my telling you that my
great friend was a detective?
Yes?
And perhaps you ve heard about this crime at the Villa
Genevi ve ?
She stared at me. Her breast heaved, and her eyes grew wide and
round.
You don t mean that you re in on that ?
I nodded. There was no doubt that I had scored heavily. Her emotion,
as she regarded me, was only too evident. For some few seconds,
she remained silent, staring at me. Then she nodded her head
emphatically.
Well, if that doesn t beat the band! Tote me round. I want to
see all the horrors.
What do you mean?
What I say. Bless the boy, didn t I tell you I doted on crimes? What
do you think I m imperilling my ankles for in high heeled shoes over
this stubble? I ve been nosing round for hours. Tried the front way
in, but that old stick in the mud of a French gendarme wasn t taking
any. I guess Helen of Troy, and Cleopatra, and Mary, Queen of Scots,
rolled in one wouldn t cut ice with him! It s a real piece of luck
happening on you this way. Come on, show me all the sights.
But look here wait a minute I can t. Nobody s allowed in. They re
awfully strict.
Aren t you and your friend the big bugs?
I was loath to relinquish my position of importance.
Why are you so keen? I asked weakly. And what is it you want
to see.
Oh, everything! The place where it happened, and the weapon,
and the body, and any finger prints or interesting things like
that. I ve never had a chance of being right in on a murder like
this before. It ll last me all my life?
I turned away, sickened. What were women coming to nowadays? The
girl s ghoulish excitement nauseated me. I had read of the mobs
of women who besieged the law courts when some wretched man was
being tried for his life on the capital charge. I had sometimes
wondered who these women were. Now I knew. They were of the
likeness of Cinderella, young, yet obsessed with a yearning for
morbid excitement, for sensation at any price, without regard to
any decency or good feeling. The vividness of the girl s beauty had
attracted me in spite of myself, yet at heart I retained my first
impression of disapproval and dislike. I thought of my mother,
long since dead. What would she have said of this strange modern
product of girlhood? The pretty face with the paint and powder,
and the ghoulish mind behind!
Come off your high horse, said the lady suddenly. And don t give
yourself airs. When you got called to this job, did you put your
nose in the air and say it was a nasty business, and you wouldn t
be mixed up in it?
No, but
If you d been here on a holiday, wouldn t you be nosing round just
the same as I am? Of course you would.
I m a man. You re a woman.
Your idea of a woman is some one who gets on a chair and shrieks
if she sees a mouse. That s all prehistoric. But you will show
me round, won t you? You see, it might make a big difference to me.
In what way?
They re keeping all the reporters out. I might make a big scoop
with one of the papers. You don t know how much they pay for a bit
of inside stuff.
I hesitated. She slipped a small soft hand into mine.
Please there s a dear.
I capitulated. Secretly, I knew that I should rather enjoy the
part of showman. After all, the moral attitude displayed by the
girl was none of my business. I was a little nervous as to what
the examining magistrate might say, but I reassured myself by the
reflection that no harm could possibly be done.
We repaired first to the spot where the body had been discovered. A
man was on guard there, who saluted respectfully, knowing me by
sight, and raised no question as to my companion. Presumably he
regarded her as vouched for by me. I explained to Cinderella just
how the discovery had been made, and she listened attentively,
sometimes putting an intelligent question. Then we turned our steps
in the direction of the Villa. I proceeded rather cautiously, for,
truth to tell, I was not at all anxious to meet any one. I took the
girl through the shrubbery round to the back of the house where
the small shed was. I recollected that yesterday evening, after
relocking the door, M. Bex had left the key with the sergent de
ville Marchaud, in case M. Giraud should require it while we are
upstairs. I thought it quite likely that the S ret detective,
after using it, had returned it to Marchaud again. Leaving the girl
out of sight in the shrubbery, I entered the house. Marchaud was on
duty outside the door of the salon . From within came the murmur
of voices.
Monsieur desires Hautet? He is within. He is again interrogating
Fran oise.
No, I said hastily, I don t want him. But I should very much
like the key of the shed outside if it is not against regulations.
But certainly, monsieur. He produced it. Here it is. M. le
juge gave orders that all facilities were to be placed at your
disposal. You will return it to me when you have finished out there,
that is all.
Of course.
I felt a thrill of satisfaction as I realized that in Marchaud s
eyes, at least, I ranked equally in importance with Poirot. The
girl was waiting for me. She gave an exclamation of delight as she
saw the key in my hand.
You ve got it then?
Of course, I said coolly. All the same, you know, what I m doing
is highly irregular.
You ve been a perfect duck, and I shan t forget it. Come
along. They can t see us from the house, can they?
Wait a minute. I arrested her eager advance. I won t stop you if
you really wish to go in. But do you? You ve seen the grave, and
the grounds, and you ve heard all the details of the affair. Isn t
that enough for you? This is going to be gruesome, you know, and
unpleasant.
She looked at me for a moment with an expression that I could not
quite fathom. Then she laughed.
Me for the horrors, she said. Come along.
In silence we arrived at the door of the shed. I opened it and we
passed in. I walked over to the body, and gently pulled down the
sheet as M. Bex had done the preceding afternoon. A little gasping
sound escaped from the girl s lips, and I turned and looked at her.
There was horror on her face now, and those debonair high spirits
of hers were quenched utterly. She had not chosen to listen to my
advice, and she was punished now for her disregard of it. I felt
singularly merciless towards her. She should go through with it
now. I turned the corpse gently over.
You see, I said, he was stabbed in the back.
Her voice was almost soundless.
With what?
I nodded towards the glass jar.
That dagger.
Suddenly the girl reeled, and then sank down in a heap. I sprang
to her assistance.
You are faint. Come out of here. It has been too much for you.
Water, she murmured. Quick. Water. . . .
I left her, and rushed into the house. Fortunately none of the
servants were about, and I was able to secure a glass of water
unobserved and add a few drops of brandy from a pocket flask. In a
few minutes I was back again. The girl was lying as I had left her,
but a few sips of the brandy and water revived her in a marvellous
manner.
Take me out of here oh, quickly, quickly! she cried, shuddering.
Supporting her with my arm I led her out into the air, and she
pulled the door to behind her. Then she drew a deep breath.
That s better. Oh, it was horrible! Why did you ever let me go in?
I felt this to be so feminine that I could not forbear
a smile. Secretly, I was not dissatisfied with her collapse.
It proved that she was not quite so callous as I had thought
her. After all she was little more than a child, and her curiosity
had probably been of the unthinking order.
I did my best to stop you, you know, I said gently.
I suppose you did. Well, good bye.
Look here, you can t start off like that all alone. You re not
fit for it. I insist on accompanying you back to Merlinville.
Nonsense. I m quite all right now.
Supposing you felt faint again? No, I shall come with you.
But this she combated with a good deal of energy. In the end,
however, I prevailed so far as to be allowed to accompany her to the
outskirts of the town. We retraced our steps over our former route,
passing the grave again, and making a detour on to the road. Where
the first straggling line of shops began, she stopped and held out
her hand.
Good bye, and thank you ever so much for coming with me.
Are you sure you re all right now?
Quite, thanks. I hope you won t get into any trouble over showing
me things?
I disclaimed the idea lightly.
Well, good bye.
Au revoir, I corrected. If you re staying here, we shall meet
again.
She flashed a smile at me.
That s so. Au revoir, then.
Wait a second, you haven t told me your address?
Oh, I m staying at the H tel du Phare. It s a little place,
but quite good. Come and look me up tomorrow.
I will, I said, with perhaps rather unnecessary empressement .
I watched her out of sight, then turned and retraced my steps to
the Villa. I remembered that I had not relocked the door of the
shed. Fortunately no one had noticed the oversight, and turning the
key I removed it and returned it to the sergent de ville . And,
as I did so, it came upon me suddenly that though Cinderella had
given me her address I still did not know her name.
9
M. Giraud Finds Some Clues
In the Salon I found the examining magistrate busily interrogating
the old gardener Auguste. Poirot and the commissary, who were
both present, greeted me respectively with a smile and a polite
bow. I slipped quietly into a seat. M. Hautet was painstaking and
meticulous in the extreme, but did not succeed in eliciting anything
of importance.
The gardening gloves Auguste admitted to be his. He wore them when
handling a certain species of primula plant which was poisonous to
some people. He could not say when he had worn them last. Certainly
he had not missed them. Where were they kept? Sometimes in one place,
sometimes in another. The spade was usually to be found in the small
tool shed. Was it locked? Of course it was locked. Where was the key
kept? Parbleu , it was in the door of course! There was nothing
of value to steal. Who would have expected a party of bandits,
of assassins? Such things did not happen in Madame la Vicomtesse s
time. M. Hautet signifying that he had finished with him, the old man
withdrew, grumbling to the last. Remembering Poirot s unaccountable
insistence on the footprints in the flower beds, I scrutinized him
narrowly as he gave his evidence. Either he had nothing to do with
the crime or he was a consummate actor. Suddenly, just as he was
going out of the door, an idea struck me. Pardon M. Hautet,
I cried, but will you permit me to ask him one question?
But certainly, monsieur.
Thus encouraged, I turned to Auguste.
Where do you keep your boots?
Sac papier! growled the old man. On my feet. Where else?
But when you go to bed at night?
Under my bed.
But who cleans them?
Nobody. Why should they be cleaned? Is it that I promenade myself
on the front like a young man? On Sunday I wear the Sunday boots,
bien entendu , but otherwise ! he shrugged his shoulders.
I shook my head, discouraged.
Well, well, said the magistrate. We do not advance very
much. Undoubtedly we are held up until we get the return cable
from Santiago. Has any one seen Giraud? In verity that one lacks
politeness! I have a very good mind to send for him and
You will not have to send far, M. le juge.
The quiet voice startled us. Giraud was standing outside looking
in through the open window.
He leaped lightly into the room, and advanced to the table.
Here I am, M. le juge, at your service. Accept my excuses for not
presenting myself sooner.
Not at all. Not at all, said the magistrate, rather confused.
Of course I am only a detective, continued the other. I know
nothing of interrogatories. Were I conducting one, I should be
inclined to do so without an open window. Any one standing outside
can so easily hear all that passes. . . . But no matter.
M. Hautet flushed angrily. There was evidently going to be no
love lost between the examining magistrate and the detective in
charge of the case. They had fallen foul of each other at the
start. Perhaps in any event it would have been much the same. To
Giraud, all examining magistrates were fools, and to M. Hautet who
took himself seriously, the casual manner of the Paris detective
could not fail to give offence.
Eh bien , M. Giraud, said the magistrate rather sharply. Without
doubt you have been employing your time to a marvel? You have the
names of the assassins for us, have you not? And also the precise
spot where they find themselves now?
Unmoved by this irony, Giraud replied:
I know at least where they have come from.
Comment?
Giraud took two small objects from his pocket and laid them down
on the table. We crowded round. The objects were very simple ones:
the stub of a cigarette, and an unlighted match. The detective
wheeled round on Poirot.
What do you see there? he asked.
There was something almost brutal in his tone. It made my cheeks
flush. But Poirot remained unmoved. He shrugged his shoulders.
A cigarette end, and a match.
And what does that tell you?
Poirot spread out his hands.
It tells me nothing.
Ah! said Giraud, in a satisfied voice. You haven t made a
study of these things. That s not an ordinary match not in this
country at least. It s common enough in South America. Luckily it s
unlighted. I mightn t have recognized it otherwise. Evidently one
of the men threw away his cigarette end, and lit another, spilling
one match out of the box as he did so.
And the other match? asked Poirot.
Which match?
The one he did light his cigarette with. You have found that
also?
No.
Perhaps you didn t search very thoroughly.
Not search thoroughly For a moment it seemed as though the
detective were going to break out angrily, but with an effort he
controlled himself. I see you love a joke, M. Poirot. But in any
case, match or no match, the cigarette end would be sufficient. It
is a South American cigarette with liquorice pectoral paper.
Poirot bowed. The commissary spoke:
The cigarette end and match might have belonged to
M. Renauld. Remember, it is only two years since he returned from
South America.
No, replied the other confidently. I have already searched among
the effects of M. Renauld. The cigarettes he smoked and the matches
he used are quite different.
You do not think it odd, asked Poirot, that these strangers
should come unprovided with a weapon, with gloves, with a spade,
and that they should so conveniently find all these things?
Giraud smiled in a rather superior manner.
Undoubtedly it is strange. Indeed, without the theory that I hold,
it would be inexplicable.
Aha! said M. Hautet. An accomplice. An accomplice within the
house!
Or outside it, said Giraud with a peculiar smile.
But some one must have admitted them? We cannot allow that, by an
unparalleled piece of good fortune, they found the door ajar for
them to walk in?
D accord , M. le juge. The door was opened for them, but it could
just as easily be opened from outside by some one who possessed
a key.
But who did possess a key?
Giraud shrugged his shoulders.
As for that, no one who possesses one is going to admit the
fact if they can help it. But several people might have had
one. M. Jack Renauld, the son, for instance. It is true that he
is on his way to South America, but he might have lost the key or
had it stolen from him. Then there is the gardener he has been
here many years. One of the younger servants may have a lover. It
is easy to take an impression of a key and have one cut. There are
many possibilities. Then there is another person who, I should judge,
is exceedingly likely to have such a thing in her keeping.
Who is that?
Madame Daubreuil, said the detective dryly.
Eh, eh! said the magistrate, his face falling a little, so you
have heard about that, have you?
I hear everything, said Giraud imperturbably.
There is one thing I could swear you have not heard, said
M. Hautet, delighted to be able to show superior knowledge, and
without more ado, he retailed the story of the mysterious visitor
the night before. He also touched on the cheque made out to Duveen,
and finally handed Giraud the letter signed Bella.
Giraud listened in silence, studied the letter attentively, and
then handed it back.
All very interesting, M. le juge. But my theory remains unaffected.
And your theory is?
For the moment I prefer not to say. Remember, I am only just
beginning my investigations.
Tell me one thing, M. Giraud, said Poirot suddenly. Your theory
allows for the door being opened. It does not explain why it was
left open. When they departed, would it not have been natural for
them to close it behind them. If a sergent de ville had chanced to
come up to the house, as is sometimes done to see that all is well,
they might have been discovered and overtaken almost at once.
Bah! They forgot it. A mistake, I grant you.
Then, to my surprise, Poirot uttered almost the same words as he
had uttered to Bex the previous evening:
I do not agree with you. The door being left open was the result
of either design or necessity, and any theory that does not admit
that fact is bound to prove vain.
We all regarded the little man with a good deal of astonishment. The
confession of ignorance drawn from him over the match end had, I
thought, been bound to humiliate him, but here he was self satisfied
as ever, laying down the law to the great Giraud without a tremor.
The detective twisted his moustache, eyeing my friend in a somewhat
bantering fashion.
You don t agree with me, eh? Well, what strikes you particularly
about the case. Let s hear your views.
One thing presents itself to me as being significant. Tell me,
M. Giraud, does nothing strike you as familiar about this case? Is
there nothing it reminds you of?
Familiar? Reminds me of? I can t say off hand. I don t think so,
though.
You are wrong, said Poirot quietly. A crime almost precisely
similar has been committed before.
When? And where?
Ah, that, unfortunately, I cannot for the moment remember but I
shall do so. I had hoped you might be able to assist me.
Giraud snorted incredulously.
There have been many affairs of masked men! I cannot remember
the details of them all. These crimes all resemble each other more
or less.
There is such a thing as the individual touch. Poirot suddenly
assumed his lecturing manner, and addressed us collectively. I
am speaking to you now of the psychology of crime. M. Giraud
knows quite well that each criminal has his particular method,
and that the police, when called in to investigate say a case of
burglary can often make a shrewd guess at the offender, simply by
the peculiar method he has employed. Japp would tell you the same,
Hastings. Man is an unoriginal animal. Unoriginal within the law in
his daily respectable life, equally unoriginal outside the law. If
a man commits a crime, any other crime he commits will resemble it
closely. The English murderer who disposed of his wives in succession
by drowning them in their baths was a case in point. Had he varied
his methods, he might have escaped detection to this day. But he
obeyed the common dictates of human nature, arguing that what had
once succeeded would succeed again, and he paid the penalty of his
lack of originality.
And the point of all this? sneered Giraud.
That when you have two crimes precisely similar in design and
execution, you find the same brain behind them both. I am looking
for that brain, M. Giraud and I shall find it. Here we have a
true clue a psychological clue. You may know all about cigarettes
and match ends, M. Giraud, but I, Hercule Poirot, know the mind
of man! And the ridiculous little fellow tapped his forehead
with emphasis.
Giraud remained singularly unimpressed.
For your guidance, continued Poirot, I will also advise you
of one fact which might fail to be brought to your notice. The
wrist watch of Madame Renauld, on the day following the tragedy,
had gained two hours. It might interest you to examine it.
Giraud stared.
Perhaps it was in the habit of gaining?
As a matter of fact, I am told it did.
Eh bien , then!
All the same, two hours is a good deal, said Poirot softly. Then
there is the matter of the footprints in the flower bed.
He nodded his head towards the open window. Giraud took two eager
strides, and looked out.
This bed here?
Yes.
But I see no footprints?
No, said Poirot, straightening a little pile of books on a
table. There are none.
For a moment an almost murderous rage obscured Giraud s face. He took
two strides towards his tormentor, but at that moment the salon
door was opened, and Marchaud announced.
M. Stonor, the secretary, has just arrived from England. May
he enter?
10
Gabriel Stonor
The man who entered the room was a striking figure. Very tall,
with a well knit athletic frame, and a deeply bronzed face and
neck, he dominated the assembly. Even Giraud seemed anaemic beside
him. When I knew him better I realized that Gabriel Stonor was quite
an unusual personality. English by birth, he had knocked about all
over the world. He had shot big game in Africa, travelled in Korea,
ranched in California, and traded in the South Sea Islands. He had
been secretary to a New York railway magnate, and had spent a year
encamped in the desert with a friendly tribe of Arabs.
His unerring eye picked out M. Hautet.
The examining magistrate in charge of the case? Pleased to meet
you, M. le juge. This is a terrible business. How s Mrs. Renauld? Is
she bearing up fairly well? It must have been an awful shock to her.
Terrible, terrible, said M. Hautet. Permit me to introduce
M. Bex our commissary of police, M. Giraud of the S ret . This
gentleman is M. Hercule Poirot. M. Renauld sent for him, but he
arrived too late to do anything to avert the tragedy. A friend of M.
Poirot s, Captain Hastings.
Stonor looked at Poirot with some interest.
Sent for you, did he?
You did not know, then, that M. Renauld contemplated calling in
a detective? interposed M. Bex.
No, I didn t. But it doesn t surprise me a bit.
Why?
Because the old man was rattled! I don t know what it was all
about. He didn t confide in me. We weren t on those terms. But
rattled he was and badly!
H m! said M. Hautet. But you have no notion of the cause?
That s what I said, sir.
You will pardon me, M. Stonor, but we must begin with a few
formalities. Your name?
Gabriel Stonor.
How long ago was it that you became secretary to M. Renauld?
About two years ago, when he first arrived from South America. I
met him through a mutual friend, and he offered me the post. A
thundering good boss he was too.
Did he talk to you much about his life in South America?
Yes, a good bit.
Do you know if he was ever in Santiago?
Several times, I believe.
He never mentioned any special incident that occurred
there anything that might have provoked some vendetta against him?
Never.
Did he speak of any secret that he had acquired whilst sojourning
there?
No.
Did he ever say anything at all about a secret?
Not that I can remember. But, for all that, there was a mystery
about him. I ve never heard him speak of his boyhood for instance,
or of any incident prior to his arrival in South America. He was a
French Canadian by birth, I believe, but I ve never heard him speak
of his life in Canada. He could shut up like a clam if he liked.
So, as far as you know, he had no enemies, and you can give us no
clue as to any secret to obtain possession of which he might have
been murdered?
That s so.
M. Stonor, have you ever heard the name of Duveen in connection
with M. Renauld?
Duveen. Duveen. He tried the name over thoughtfully. I don t
think I have. And yet it seems familiar.
Do you know a lady, a friend of M. Renauld s whose Christian name
is Bella?
Again Mr. Stonor shook his head.
Bella Duveen? Is that the full name? It s curious! I m sure I
know it. But for the moment I can t remember in what connection.
The magistrate coughed.
You understand, M. Stonor the case is like this. There must be no
reservations. You might, perhaps, through a feeling of consideration
for Madame Renauld for whom, I gather, you have a great esteem
and affection, you might enfin! said M. Hautet getting rather
tied up in his sentence, there must absolutely be no reservations.
Stonor stared at him, a dawning light of comprehension in his eyes.
I don t quite get you, he said gently. Where does Mrs. Renauld
come in? I ve an immense respect and affection for that lady;
she s a very wonderful and unusual type, but I don t quite see how
my reservations, or otherwise, could affect her?
Not if this Bella Duveen should prove to have been something more
than a friend to her husband?
Ah! said Stonor. I get you now. But I ll bet my bottom dollar that
you re wrong. The old man never so much as looked at a petticoat. He
just adored his own wife. They were the most devoted couple I know.
M. Hautet shook his head gently.
M. Stonor, we hold absolute proof a love letter written by this
Bella to M. Renauld, accusing him of having tired of her. Moreover,
we have further proof that, at the time of his death, he was carrying
on an intrigue with a Frenchwoman, a Madame Daubreuil, who rents
the adjoining Villa. And this is the man who, according to you,
never looked at a petticoat!
The secretary s eyes narrowed.
Hold on, M. le juge. You re barking up the wrong tree. I knew Paul
Renauld. What you ve just been saying is utterly impossible. There s
some other explanation.
The magistrate shrugged his shoulders.
What other explanation could there be?
What leads you to think it was a love affair?
Madame Daubreuil was in the habit of visiting him here in the
evenings. Also, since M. Renauld came to the Villa Genevi ve, Madame
Daubreuil has paid large sums of money into the bank in notes. In
all, the amount totals four thousand pounds of your English money.
I guess that s right, said Stonor quietly. I transmitted him
those sums at his request. But it wasn t an intrigue.
Eh! mon Dieu! What else could it be?
Blackmail , said Stonor sharply, bringing down his hand with a
slam on the table. That s what it was.
Ah! Voil une id e! cried the magistrate, shaken in spite
of himself.
Blackmail, repeated Stonor. The old man was being bled and at
a good rate too. Four thousand in a couple of months. Whew! I told
you just now there was a mystery about Renauld. Evidently this
Madame Daubreuil knew enough of it to put the screws on.
It is possible, the commissary cried excitedly. Decidedly,
it is possible.
Possible? roared Stonor. It s certain! Tell me, have you asked
Mrs. Renauld about this love affair stunt of yours?
No, monsieur. We did not wish to occasion her any distress if it
could reasonably be avoided.
Distress? Why, she d laugh in your face. I tell you, she and
Renauld were a couple in a hundred.
Ah, that reminds me of another point, said M. Hautet. Did
M. Renauld take you into his confidence at all as to the dispositions
of his will?
I know all about it took it to the lawyer for him after he d drawn
it out. I can give you the name of his solicitors if you want to
see it. They ve got it there. Quite simple. Half in trust to his
wife for her lifetime, the other half to his son. A few legacies. I
rather think he left me a thousand.
When was this will drawn up?
Oh, about a year and a half ago.
Would it surprise you very much, M. Stonor, to hear that M. Renauld
had made another will, less than a fortnight ago?
Stonor was obviously very much surprised.
I d no idea of it. What s it like?
The whole of his vast fortune is left unreservedly to his
wife. There is no mention of his son.
Mr. Stonor gave vent to a prolonged whistle.
I call that rather rough on the lad. His mother adores him, of
course, but to the world at large it looks rather like a want of
confidence on his father s part. It will be rather galling to his
pride. Still, it all goes to prove what I told you, that Renauld
and his wife were on first rate terms.
Quite so, quite so, said M. Hautet. It is possible we shall
have to revise our ideas on several points. We have, of course,
cabled to Santiago, and are expecting a reply from there any
minute. In all possibility, everything will then be perfectly
clear and straightforward. On the other hand, if your suggestion
of blackmail is true, Madame Daubreuil ought to be able to give us
valuable information.
Poirot interjected a remark:
M. Stonor, the English chauffeur, Masters, had he been long with
M. Renauld?
Over a year?
Have you any idea whether he has ever been in South America?
I m quite sure he hasn t. Before coming to Mr. Renauld, he had been
for many years with some people in Gloucestershire whom I know well.
In fact, you can answer for him as being above suspicion?
Absolutely.
Poirot seemed somewhat crest fallen.
Meanwhile the magistrate had summoned Marchaud.
My compliments to Madame Renauld, and I should be glad to speak
to her for a few minutes. Beg her not to disturb herself. I will
wait upon her upstairs.
Marchaud saluted and disappeared.
We waited some minutes, and then, to our surprise, the door opened,
and Mrs. Renauld, deathly pale in her heavy mourning, entered
the room.
M. Hautet brought forward a chair, uttering vigorous protestations,
and she thanked him with a smile. Stonor was holding one hand
of hers in his with an eloquent sympathy. Words evidently failed
him. Mrs. Renauld turned to M. Hautet.
You wished to ask me something, M. le juge.
With your permission, madame. I understand your husband was a
French Canadian by birth. Can you tell me anything of his youth,
or upbringing?
She shook her head.
My husband was always very reticent about himself, monsieur. He
came from the North West, I know, but I fancy that he had an unhappy
childhood, for he never cared to speak of that time. Our life was
lived entirely in the present and the future.
Was there any mystery in his past life?
Mrs. Renauld smiled a little, and shook her head.
Nothing so romantic, I am sure, M. le juge.
M. Hautet also smiled.
True, we must not permit ourselves to get melodramatic. There is
one thing more he hesitated.
Stonor broke in impetuously:
They ve got an extraordinary idea into their heads
Mrs. Renauld. They actually fancy that Mr. Renauld was carrying on
an intrigue with a Madame Daubreuil who, it seems, lives next door.
The scarlet colour flamed into Mrs. Renauld s cheeks. She flung her
head up, then bit her lip, her face quivering. Stonor stood looking
at her in astonishment, but M. Bex leaned forward and said gently:
We regret to cause you pain, madame, but have you any reason to
believe that Madame Daubreuil was your husband s mistress?
With a sob of anguish, Mrs. Renauld buried her face in her hands. Her
shoulders heaved convulsively. At last she lifted her head, and
said brokenly:
She may have been.
Never, in all my life, have I seen anything to equal the blank
amazement on Stonor s face. He was thoroughly taken aback.
11
Jack Renauld
What the next development of the conversation would have been, I
cannot say, for at that moment the door was thrown violently open,
and a tall young man strode into the room.
Just for a moment I had the uncanny sensation that the dead man
had come to life again. Then I realized that this dark head was
untouched with grey, and that, in point of fact, it was a mere
boy who now burst in among us with so little ceremony. He went
straight to Mrs. Renauld with an impetuosity that took no heed of
the presence of others.
Mother!
Jack! With a cry she folded him in her arms. My dearest! But what
brings you here? You were to sail on the Anzora from Cherbourg
two days ago? Then, suddenly recalling to herself the presence of
others, she turned with a certain dignity, My son, messieurs.
Aha! said M. Hautet, acknowledging the young man s bow. So you
did not sail on the Anzora ?
No, monsieur. As I was about to explain, the Anzora was detained
twenty four hours through engine trouble. I should have sailed
last night instead of the night before, but, happening to buy an
evening paper, I saw in it an account of the the awful tragedy
that had befallen us His voice broke and the tears came into
his eyes. My poor father my poor, poor, father.
Staring at him like one in a dream, Mrs. Renauld repeated: So you
did not sail? And then, with a gesture of infinite weariness, she
murmured as though to herself, After all, it does not matter now.
Sit down, M. Renauld, I beg of you, said M. Hautet, indicating
a chair. My sympathy for you is profound. It must have been a
terrible shock to you to learn the news as you did. However, it is
most fortunate that you were prevented from sailing. I am in hopes
that you may be able to give us just the information we need to
clear up this mystery.
I am at your disposal, M. le juge. Ask me any questions you please.
To begin with, I understand that this journey was being undertaken
at your father s request?
Quite so, M. le juge. I received a telegram bidding me to proceed
without delay to Buenos Ayres, and from thence via the Andes to
Valparaiso and on to Santiago.
Ah. And the object of this journey?
I have no idea, M. le juge.
What?
No. See, here is the telegram.
The magistrate took it and read it aloud.
Proceed immediately Cherbourg embark Anzora sailing tonight
Buenos Ayres. Ultimate destination Santiago. Further instructions
will await you Buenos Ayres. Do not fail. Matter is of utmost
importance. Renauld. And there had been no previous correspondence
on the matter?
Jack Renauld shook his head.
That is the only intimation of any kind. I knew, of course, that
my father, having lived so long out there, had necessarily many
interests in South America. But he had never mooted any suggestion
of sending me out.
You have, of course, been a good deal in South America, M. Renauld?
I was there as a child. But I was educated in England, and spent
most of my holidays in that country, so I really know far less of
South America than might be supposed. You see, the war broke out
when I was seventeen.
You served in the English Flying Corps, did you not?
Yes, M. le juge.
M. Hautet nodded his head, and proceeded with his inquiries along
the, by now, well known lines. In response, Jack Renauld declared
definitely that he knew nothing of any enmity his father might have
incurred in the city of Santiago, or elsewhere in the South American
continent, that he had noticed no change in his father s manner of
late, and that he had never heard him refer to a secret. He had
regarded the mission to South America as connected with business
interests.
As M. Hautet paused for a minute, the quiet voice of Giraud broke in.
I should like to put a few questions on my own account, M. le
judge.
By all means, M. Giraud, if you wish, said the magistrate coldly.
Giraud edged his chair a little nearer to the table.
Were you on good terms with your father, M. Renauld?
Certainly I was, returned the lad haughtily.
You assert that positively?
Yes.
No little disputes, eh?
Jack shrugged his shoulders. Every one may have a difference of
opinion now and then.
Quite so, quite so. But if any one were to assert that you had a
violent quarrel with your father on the eve of your departure for
Paris, that person, without doubt, would be lying?
I could not but admire the ingenuity of Giraud. His boast I
know everything had been no idle one. Jack Renauld was clearly
disconcerted by the question.
We we did have an argument, he admitted.
Ah, an argument! In the course of that argument did you use this
phrase: When you are dead, I can do as I please?
I may have done, muttered the other. I don t know.
In response to that, did your father say: But I am not dead
yet! To which you responded: I wish you were!
The boy made no answer. His hands fiddled nervously with the things
on the table in front of him.
I must request an answer, please, M. Renauld, said Giraud sharply.
With an angry exclamation, the boy swept a heavy paper knife on to
the floor.
What does it matter? You might as well know. Yes, I did quarrel
with my father. I dare say I said all those things I was so angry
I cannot even remember what I said! I was furious I could almost
have killed him at that moment there, make the most of that! He
leant back in his chair, flushed and defiant.
Giraud smiled, then, moving his chair back a little, said:
That is all. You would, without doubt, prefer to continue the
interrogatory, M. le juge.
Ah, yes, exactly, said M. Hautet. And what was the subject of
your quarrel?
I decline to state.
M. Hautet sat up in his chair.
M. Renauld, it is not permitted to trifle with the law! he
thundered. What was the subject of the quarrel?
Young Renauld remained silent, his boyish face sullen and
overcast. But another voice spoke, imperturbable and calm, the
voice of Hercule Poirot.
I will inform you, if you like, M. le juge.
You know?
Certainly I know. The subject of the quarrel was Mademoiselle
Marthe Daubreuil.
Renauld sprang round, startled. The magistrate leaned forward.
Is this so, monsieur.
Jack Renauld bowed his head.
Yes, he admitted. I love Mademoiselle Daubreuil, and I wish to
marry her. When I informed my father of the fact, he flew at once
into a violent rage. Naturally I could not stand hearing the girl
I loved insulted, and I, too, lost my temper.
M. Hautet looked across at Mrs. Renauld.
You were aware of this attachment, madame.
I feared it, she replied simply.
Mother, cried the boy. You too! Marthe is as good as she is
beautiful. What can you have against her?
I have nothing against Mademoiselle Daubreuil in any way. But I
should prefer you to marry an Englishwoman, or if a Frenchwoman
not one who has a mother of doubtful antecedents!
Her rancour against the older woman showed plainly in her voice,
and I could well understand that it must have been a bitter blow
to her when her only son showed signs of falling in love with the
daughter of her rival.
Mrs. Renauld continued, addressing the magistrate:
I ought, perhaps, to have spoken to my husband on the subject, but
I hoped that it was only a boy and girl flirtation which would blow
over all the quicker if no notice was taken of it. I blame myself
now for my silence, but my husband, as I told you, had seemed so
anxious and care worn, different altogether from his normal self,
that I was chiefly concerned not to give him any additional worry.
M. Hautet nodded.
When you informed your father of your intentions towards
Mademoiselle Daubreuil, he resumed, he was surprised?
He seemed completely taken aback. Then he ordered me peremptorily
to dismiss any such idea from my mind. He would never give his
consent to such a marriage. Nettled, I demanded what he had against
Mademoiselle Daubreuil. To that he could give no satisfactory reply,
but spoke in slighting terms of the mystery surrounding the lives
of the mother and daughter. I answered that I was marrying Marthe,
and not her antecedents, but he shouted me down with a peremptory
refusal to discuss the matter in any way. The whole thing must
be given up. The injustice and high handedness of it all maddened
me especially since he himself always seemed to go out of his
way to be attentive to the Daubreuils and was always suggesting
that they should be asked to the house. I lost my head, and we
quarrelled in earnest. My father reminded me that I was entirely
dependent on him, and it must have been in answer to that that I
made the remark about doing as I pleased after his death
Poirot interrupted with a quick question.
You were aware, then, of the terms of your father s will?
I knew that he had left half his fortune to me, the other half in
trust for my mother to come to me at her death, replied the lad.
Proceed with your story, said the magistrate.
After that we shouted at each other in sheer rage, until I suddenly
realized that I was in danger of missing my train to Paris. I had
to run for the station, still in a white heat of fury. However,
once well away, I calmed down. I wrote to Marthe, telling her what
had happened, and her reply soothed me still further. She pointed
out to me that we had only to be steadfast, and any opposition
was bound to give way at last. Our affection for each other must
be tried and proved, and when my parents realized that it was no
light infatuation on my part they would doubtless relent towards
us. Of course, to her, I had not dwelt on my father s principal
objection to the match. I soon saw that I should do my cause no
good by violence. My father wrote me several letters to Paris,
affectionate in tone, and which did not refer to our disagreement
or its cause, and I replied in the same strain.
You can produce those letters, eh? said Giraud.
I did not keep them.
No matter, said the detective.
Renauld looked at him for a moment, but the magistrate was continuing
his questions.
To pass to another matter, are you acquainted with the name of
Duveen, M. Renauld?
Duveen? said Jack. Duveen? He leant forward, and slowly picked up
the paper knife he had swept from the table. As he lifted his head,
his eyes met the watching ones of Giraud. Duveen? No, I can t say
I am.
Will you read this letter, M. Renauld? And tell me if you have
any idea as to who the person was who addressed it to your father?
Jack Renauld took the letter, and read it through, the colour
mounting in his face as he did so.
Addressed to my father? The emotion and indignation in his tones
were evident.
Yes. We found it in the pocket of his coat.
Does He hesitated, throwing the merest fraction of a glance
towards his mother. The magistrate understood.
As yet no. Can you give us any clue as to the writer?
I have no idea whatsoever.
M. Hautet sighed.
A most mysterious case. Ah, well, I suppose we can now rule out
the letter altogether. What do you think, M. Giraud? It does not
seem to lead us anywhere.
It certainly does not, agreed the detective with emphasis.
And yet, sighed the magistrate, it promised at the beginning to
be such a beautiful and simple case! He caught Mrs. Renauld s eye,
and blushed in immediate confusion. Ah, yes, he coughed, turning
over the papers on the table. Let me see, where were we? Oh, the
weapon. I fear this may give you pain, M. Renauld. I understand it
was a present from you to your mother. Very sad very distressing
Jack Renauld leaned forward. His face, which had flushed during
the perusal of the letter, was now deadly white.
Do you mean that it was with an aeroplane wire paper cutter
that my father was was killed? But it s impossible! A little thing
like that!
Alas, M. Renauld, it is only too true! An ideal little tool,
I fear. Sharp and easy to handle.
Where is it? Can I see it? Is it still in the the body?
Oh, no, it had been removed. You would like to see it? To make
sure? It would be as well, perhaps, though madame has already
identified it. Still M. Bex, might I trouble you?
Certainly, M. le juge. I will fetch it immediately.
Would it not be better to take M. Renauld to the shed? suggested
Giraud smoothly. Without doubt he would wish to see his father s
body.
The boy made a shivering gesture of negation, and the magistrate,
always disposed to cross Giraud whenever possible, replied.
But no not at present. M. Bex will be so kind as to bring it to
us here.
The commissary left the room. Stonor crossed to Jack, and wrung
him by the hand. Poirot had risen and was adjusting a pair of
candlesticks that struck his trained eye as being a shade askew. The
magistrate was reading the mysterious love letter through a last
time, clinging desperately to his first theory of jealousy and a
stab in the back.
Suddenly the door burst open and the commissary rushed in.
M. le juge! M. le juge!
But yes. What is it?
The dagger! It is gone!
Comment gone?
Vanished. Disappeared. The glass jar that contained it is empty!
What? I cried. Impossible. Why, only this morning I saw
The words died on my tongue.
But the attention of the entire room was diverted to me.
What is that you say? cried the commissary. This morning?
I saw it there this morning, I said slowly. About an hour and
a half ago, to be accurate.
You went to the shed, then? How did you get the key?
I asked the sergent de ville for it.
And you went there? Why?
I hesitated, but in the end I decided that the only thing to do
was to make a clean breast of it.
M. le juge, I said. I have committed a grave fault, for which
I must crave your indulgence.
Eh bien! Proceed, monsieur.
The fact of the matter is, I said, wishing myself anywhere else
than where I was, that I met a young lady, an acquaintance of
mine. She displayed a great desire to see everything that was to
be seen, and I well, in short, I took the key to show her the body.
Ah, par exemple , cried the magistrate indignantly. But it
is a grave fault you have committed there, Captain Hastings. It is
altogether most irregular. You should not have permitted yourself
this folly.
I know, I said meekly. Nothing that you can say could be too
severe, M. le juge.
You did not invite this lady to come here?
Certainly not. I met her quite by accident. She is an English lady
who happens to be staying in Merlinville, though I was not aware
of that until my unexpected meeting with her.
Well, well, said the magistrate, softening. It was most
irregular, but the lady is without doubt young and beautiful,
n est ce pas ? What it is to be young! O jeunesse, jeunesse!
And he sighed sentimentally.
But the commissary, less romantic, and more practical, took up
the tale:
But did not you reclose and lock the door when you departed.
That s just it, I said slowly. That s what I blame myself
for so terribly. My friend was upset at the sight. She nearly
fainted. I got her some brandy and water, and afterwards insisted
on accompanying her back to town. In the excitement, I forgot to
relock the door. I only did so when I got back to the Villa.
Then for twenty minutes at least said the commissary slowly. He
stopped.
Exactly, I said.
Twenty minutes, mused the commissary.
It is deplorable, said M. Hautet, his sternness of manner
returning. Without precedent.
Suddenly another voice spoke.
You find it deplorable, M. le juge? asked Giraud.
Certainly I do.
Eh bien! I find it admirable, said the other imperturbably.
This unexpected ally quite bewildered me.
Admirable, M. Giraud? asked the magistrate, studying him cautiously
out of the corner of his eye.
Precisely.
And why?
Because we know now that the assassin, or an accomplice of the
assassin, has been near the Villa only an hour ago. It will be
strange if, with that knowledge, we do not shortly lay hands upon
him. There was a note of menace in his voice. He continued: He
risked a good deal to gain possession of that dagger. Perhaps he
feared that finger prints might be discovered on it.
Poirot turned to Bex.
You said there were none?
Giraud shrugged his shoulders.
Perhaps he could not be sure.
Poirot looked at him.
You are wrong, M. Giraud. The assassin wore gloves. So he must
have been sure.
I do not say it was the assassin himself. It may have been an
accomplice who was not aware of that fact.
Ils sont mal renseign s, les accomplices! muttered Poirot,
but he said no more.
The magistrate s clerk was gathering up the papers on the
table. M. Hautet addressed us:
Our work here is finished. Perhaps, M. Renauld, you will listen
whilst your evidence is read over to you. I have purposely kept
all the proceedings as informal as possible. I have been called
original in my methods, but I maintain that there is much to be
said for originality. The case is now in the clever hands of the
renowned M. Giraud. He will without doubt distinguish himself.
Indeed, I wonder that he has not already laid his hands upon
the murderers! Madame, again let me assure you of my heart felt
sympathy. Messieurs, I wish you all good day. And, accompanied by
his clerk and the commissary, he took his departure.
Poirot tugged out that large turnip of a watch of his, and observed
the time.
Let us return to the hotel for lunch, my friend, he said. And you
shall recount to me in full the indiscretions of this morning. No
one is observing us. We need make no adieux.
We went quietly out of the room. The examining magistrate had just
driven off in his car. I was going down the steps when Poirot s
voice arrested me:
One little moment, my friend. Dexterously, he whipped out his
yard measure, and proceeded, quite solemnly, to measure an overcoat
hanging in the hall from the collar to the hem. I had not seen it
hanging there before, and guessed that it belonged to either Mr.
Stonor, or Jack Renauld.
Then, with a little satisfied grunt, Poirot returned the measure
to his pocket, and followed me out into the open air.
12
Poirot Elucidates Certain Points
Why did you measure that overcoat? I asked, with some curiosity,
as we walked down the hot white road at a leisurely pace.
Parbleu! to see how long it was, replied my friend imperturbably.
I was vexed. Poirot s incurable habit of making a mystery out of
nothing never failed to irritate me. I relapsed into silence, and
followed a train of thought of my own. Although I had not noticed
them specially at the time, certain words Mrs. Renauld had addressed
to her son now recurred to me, fraught with a new significance. So
you did not sail? she had said, and then had added: After all,
it does not matter now.
What had she meant by that? The words were enigmatical
significant. Was it possible that she knew more than we supposed? She
had denied all knowledge of the mysterious mission with which her
husband was to have entrusted his son. But was she really less
ignorant than she pretended? Could she enlighten us if she chose,
and was her silence part of a carefully thought out and preconceived
plan?
The more I thought about it, the more I was convinced that I
was right. Mrs. Renauld knew more than she chose to tell. In her
surprise at seeing her son, she had momentarily betrayed herself. I
felt convinced that she knew, if not the assassins, at least the
motive for the assassination. But some very powerful considerations
must keep her silent.
You think profoundly, my friend, remarked Poirot, breaking in
upon my reflections. What is it that intrigues you so?
I told him, sure of my ground, though feeling expectant that he would
ridicule my suspicions. But to my surprise he nodded thoughtfully.
You are quite right, Hastings. From the beginning I have been
sure that she was keeping something back. At first I suspected her,
if not of inspiring, at least of conniving at the crime.
You suspected her ? I cried.
But certainly! She benefits enormously in fact, by this new
will, she is the only person to benefit. So, from the start, she
was singled out for attention. You may have noticed that I took an
early opportunity of examining her wrists. I wished to see whether
there was any possibility that she had gagged and bound herself. Eh
bien , I saw at once that there was no fake, the cords had actually
been drawn so tight as to cut into the flesh. That ruled out the
possibility of her having committed the crime single handed. But
it was still possible for her to have connived at it, or to have
been the instigator with an accomplice. Moreover, the story, as
she told it, was singularly familiar to me the masked men that
she could not recognize, the mention of the secret I had heard,
or read, all these things before. Another little detail confirmed
my belief that she was not speaking the truth. The wrist watch,
Hastings, the wrist watch!
Again that wrist watch! Poirot was eyeing me curiously.
You see, mon ami ? You comprehend?
No, I replied with some ill humour. I neither see nor
comprehend. You make all these confounded mysteries, and it s
useless asking you to explain. You always like keeping everything
up your sleeve to the last minute.
Do not enrage yourself, my friend, said Poirot with a smile. I
will explain if you wish. But not a word to Giraud, c est
entendu ? He treats me as an old one of no importance! We shall
see! In common fairness I gave him a hint. If he does not choose
to act upon it, that is his own look out.
I assured Poirot that he could rely upon my discretion.
C est bien! Let us then employ our little grey cells. Tell me, my
friend, at what time, according to you, did the tragedy take place?
Why, at two o clock or thereabouts, I said, astonished. You
remember, Mrs. Renauld told us that she heard the clock strike
while the men were in the room.
Exactly, and on the strength of that, you, the examining
magistrate, Bex, and every one else, accept the time without further
question. But I, Hercule Poirot, say that Madame Renauld lied. The
crime took place at least two hours earlier.
But the doctors
They declared, after examination of the body, that death had
taken place between ten and seven hours previously. Mon ami ,
for some reason, it was imperative that the crime should seem to
have taken place later than it actually did. You have read of a
smashed watch or clock recording the exact hour of a crime? So
that the time should not rest on Mrs. Renauld s testimony alone,
some one moved on the hands of that wrist watch to two o clock,
and then dashed it violently to the ground. But, as is often the
case, they defeated their own object. The glass was smashed, but
the mechanism of the watch was uninjured. It was a most disastrous
manoeuvre on their part, for it at once drew my attention to two
points first, that Madame Renauld was lying: secondly, that there
must be some vital reason for the postponement of the time.
But what reason could there be?
Ah, that is the question! There we have the whole mystery. As yet,
I cannot explain it. There is only one idea that presents itself
to me as having a possible connection.
And that is?
The last train left Merlinville at seventeen minutes past twelve.
I followed it out slowly.
So that, the crime apparently taking place some two hours later,
any one leaving by that train would have an unimpeachable alibi!
Perfect, Hastings! You have it!
I sprang up.
But we must inquire at the station. Surely they cannot have failed
to notice two foreigners who left by that train! We must go there
at once!
You think so, Hastings?
Of course. Let us go there now.
Poirot restrained my ardour with a light touch upon the arm.
Go by all means if you wish, mon ami but if you go, I should
not ask for particulars of two foreigners.
I stared, and he said rather impatiently:
L , l , you do not believe all that rigmarole, do you? The masked
men and all the rest of cette histoire l !
His words took me so much aback that I hardly knew how to respond. He
went on serenely:
You heard me say to Giraud, did you not, that all the details of
this crime were familiar to me? Eh bien , that presupposes one
of two things, either the brain that planned the first crime also
planned this one, or else an account read of a cause c l bre
unconsciously remained in our assassin s memory and prompted the
details. I shall be able to pronounce definitely on that after
he broke off.
I was revolving sundry matters in my mind.
But Mr. Renauld s letter? It distinctly mentions a secret and
Santiago?
Undoubtedly there was a secret in M. Renauld s life there can be
no doubt of that. On the other hand, the word Santiago, to my mind,
is a red herring, dragged continually across the track to put us off
the scent. It is possible that it was used in the same way on M.
Renauld, to keep him from directing his suspicions into a quarter
nearer at hand. Oh, be assured, Hastings, the danger that threatened
him was not in Santiago, it was near at hand, in France.
He spoke so gravely, and with such assurance, that I could not fail
to be convinced. But I essayed one final objection:
And the match and cigarette end found near the body? What of them.
A light of pure enjoyment lit up Poirot s face.
Planted! Deliberately planted there for Giraud or one of his
tribe to find! Ah, he is smart, Giraud, he can do his tricks! So
can a good retriever dog. He comes in so pleased with himself. For
hours he has crawled on his stomach. See what I have found, he
says. And then again to me: What do you see here? Me, I answer,
with profound and deep truth, Nothing. And Giraud, the great
Giraud, he laughs, he thinks to himself, Oh, that he is imbecile,
this old one! But we shall see. . . .
But my mind had reverted to the main facts.
Then all this story of the masked men ?
Is false.
What really happened?
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
One person could tell us Madame Renauld. But she will not
speak. Threats and entreaties would not move her. A remarkable woman
that, Hastings. I recognized as soon as I saw her that I had to deal
with a woman of unusual character. At first, as I told you, I was
inclined to suspect her of being concerned in the crime. Afterwards
I altered my opinion.
What made you do that?
Her spontaneous and genuine grief at the sight of her husband s
body. I could swear that the agony in that cry of hers was genuine.
Yes, I said thoughtfully, one cannot mistake these things.
I beg your pardon, my friend one can always be mistaken. Regard
a great actress, does not her acting of grief carry you away and
impress you with its reality? No, however strong my own impression
and belief, I needed other evidence before I allowed myself to
be satisfied. The great criminal can be a great actor. I base my
certainty in this case, not upon my own impression, but upon the
undeniable fact that Mrs. Renauld actually fainted. I turned up her
eyelids and felt her pulse. There was no deception the swoon was
genuine. Therefore I was satisfied that her anguish was real and not
assumed. Besides, a small additional point not without interest, it
was unnecessary for Mrs. Renauld to exhibit unrestrained grief. She
had had one paroxysm on learning of her husband s death, and there
would be no need for her to simulate another such a violent one on
beholding his body. No, Mrs. Renauld was not her husband s murderess.
But why has she lied? She lied about the wrist watch, she lied about
the masked men she lied about a third thing. Tell me, Hastings,
what is your explanation of the open door?
Well, I said, rather embarrassed, I suppose it was an
oversight. They forgot to shut it.
Poirot shook his head, and sighed.
That is the explanation of Giraud. It does not satisfy me. There is
a meaning behind that open door which for a moment I cannot fathom.
I have an idea, I cried suddenly.
A la bonne heure! Let us hear it.
Listen. We are agreed that Mrs. Renauld s story is a fabrication. Is
it not possible, then, that Mr. Renauld left the house to keep an
appointment possibly with the murderer leaving the front door
open for his return. But he did not return, and the next morning
he is found, stabbed in the back.
An admirable theory, Hastings, but for two facts which you have
characteristically overlooked. In the first place, who gagged and
bound Madame Renauld? And why on earth should they return to
the house to do so? In the second place, no man on earth would
go out to keep an appointment wearing his underclothes and an
overcoat. There are circumstances in which a man might wear pajamas
and an overcoat but the other, never!
True, I said, rather crest fallen.
No, continued Poirot, we must look elsewhere for a solution of
the open door mystery. One thing I am fairly sure of they did not
leave through the door. They left by the window.
What?
Precisely.
But there were no footmarks in the flower bed underneath.
No and there ought to have been. Listen, Hastings. The gardener,
Auguste, as you heard him say, planted both those beds the preceding
afternoon. In the one there are plentiful impressions of his big
hobnailed boots in the other, none ! You see? Some one had passed
that way, some one who, to obliterate their footprints, smoothed
over the surface of the bed with a rake.
Where did they get a rake?
Where they got the spade and the gardening gloves, said Poirot
impatiently. There is no difficulty about that.
What makes you think that they left that way, though? Surely it is
more probable that they entered by the window, and left by the door.
That is possible of course. Yet I have a strong idea that they
left by the window.
I think you are wrong.
Perhaps, mon ami .
I mused, thinking over the new field of conjecture that Poirot s
deductions had opened up to me. I recalled my wonder at his cryptic
allusions to the flower bed and the wrist watch. His remarks had
seemed so meaningless at the moment and now, for the first time,
I realized how remarkably, from a few slight incidents, he had
unravelled much of the mystery that surrounded the case. I paid
a belated homage to my friend. As though he read my thoughts,
he nodded sagely.
Method, you comprehend! Method! Arrange your facts. Arrange your
ideas. And if some little fact will not fit in do not reject it
but consider it closely. Though its significance escapes you,
be sure that it is significant.
In the meantime, I said, considering, although we know a great
deal more than we did, we are no nearer to solving the mystery of
who killed Mr. Renauld.
No, said Poirot cheerfully. In fact we are a great deal further
off.
The fact seemed to afford him such peculiar satisfaction that I
gazed at him in wonder. He met my eye and smiled.
But yes, it is better so. Before, there was at all events a clear
theory as to how and by whose hands he met his death. Now that is
all gone. We are in darkness. A hundred conflicting points confuse
and worry us. That is well. That is excellent. Out of confusion
comes forth order. But if you find order to start with, if a crime
seems simple and above board, eh bien, m fiez vous ! It is,
how do you say it? cooked! The great criminal is simple but
very few criminals are great. In trying to cover up their tracks,
they invariably betray themselves. Ah, mon ami , I would that some
day I could meet a really great criminal one who commits his crime,
and then does nothing! Even I, Hercule Poirot, might fail to catch
such a one.
But I had not followed his words. A light had burst upon me.
Poirot! Mrs. Renauld! I see it now. She must be shielding somebody.
From the quietness with which Poirot received my remark, I could
see that the idea had already occurred to him.
Yes, he said thoughtfully. Shielding some one or screening
some one. One of the two.
I saw very little difference between the two words, but I developed
my theme with a good deal of earnestness. Poirot maintained a
strictly non committal attitude, repeating:
It may be yes, it may be. But as yet I do not know! There is
something very deep underneath all this. You will see. Something
very deep.
Then, as we entered our hotel, he enjoined silence on me with
a gesture.
13
The Girl with the Anxious Eyes
We lunched with an excellent appetite. I understood well enough
that Poirot did not wish to discuss the tragedy where we could so
easily be overheard. But, as is usual when one topic fills the mind
to the exclusion of everything else, no other subject of interest
seemed to present itself. For a while we ate in silence, and then
Poirot observed maliciously:
Eh bien! And your indiscretions! You recount them not?
I felt myself blushing.
Oh, you mean this morning? I endeavoured to adopt a tone of
absolute nonchalance.
But I was no match for Poirot. In a very few minutes he had extracted
the whole story from me, his eyes twinkling as he did so.
Tiens! A story of the most romantic. What is her name, this
charming young lady?
I had to confess that I did not know.
Still more romantic! The first rencontre in the train from Paris,
the second here. Journeys end in lovers meetings, is not that
the saying?
Don t be an ass, Poirot.
Yesterday it was Mademoiselle Daubreuil, today it is
Mademoiselle Cinderella! Decidedly you have the heart of a Turk,
Hastings! You should establish a harem!
It s all very well to rag me. Mademoiselle Daubreuil is a very
beautiful girl, and I do admire her immensely I don t mind
admitting it. The other s nothing don t suppose I shall ever
see her again. She was quite amusing to talk to just for a railway
journey, but she s not the kind of girl I should ever get keen on.
Why?
Well it sounds snobbish perhaps but she s not a lady, not in
any sense of the word.
Poirot nodded thoughtfully. There was less raillery in his voice
as he asked:
You believe, then, in birth and breeding?
I may be old fashioned, but I certainly don t believe in marrying
out of one s class. It never answers.
I agree with you, mon ami . Ninety nine times out of a hundred,
it is as you say. But there is always the hundredth time! Still,
that does not arise, as you do not propose to see the lady again.
His last words were almost a question, and I was aware of the
sharpness with which he darted a glance at me. And before my eyes,
writ large in letters of fire, I saw the words H tel du Phare,
and I heard again her voice saying Come and look me up and my
own answering with empressement : I will.
Well, what of it? I had meant to go at the time. But since then, I
had had time to reflect. I did not like the girl. Thinking it over in
cold blood, I came definitely to the conclusion that I disliked her
intensely. I had got hauled over the coals for foolishly gratifying
her morbid curiosity, and I had not the least wish to see her again.
I answered Poirot lightly enough.
She asked me to look her up, but of course I shan t.
Why of course ?
Well I don t want to.
I see. He studied me attentively for some minutes. Yes. I see
very well. And you are wise. Stick to what you have said.
That seems to be your invariable advice, I remarked, rather piqued.
Ah, my friend, have faith in Papa Poirot. Some day, if you permit,
I will arrange you a marriage of great suitability.
Thank you, I said laughing, but the prospect leaves me cold.
Poirot sighed and shook his head.
Les Anglais! he murmured. No method absolutely none
whatever. They leave all to chance! He frowned, and altered the
position of the salt cellar.
Mademoiselle Cinderella is staying at the H tel d Angleterre you
told me, did you not?
No. H tel du Phare.
True, I forgot.
A moment s misgiving shot across my mind. Surely I had never
mentioned any hotel to Poirot. I looked across at him, and felt
reassured. He was cutting his bread into neat little squares,
completely absorbed in his task. He must have fancied I had told
him where the girl was staying.
We had coffee outside facing the sea. Poirot smoked one of his tiny
cigarettes, and then drew his watch from his pocket.
The train to Paris leaves at 2:25, he observed. I should be
starting.
Paris? I cried.
That is what I said, mon ami .
You are going to Paris? But why?
He replied very seriously.
To look for the murderer of M. Renauld.
You think he is in Paris?
I am quite certain that he is not. Nevertheless, it is there that
I must look for him. You do not understand, but I will explain
it all to you in good time. Believe me, this journey to Paris is
necessary. I shall not be away long. In all probability I shall
return tomorrow. I do not propose that you should accompany
me. Remain here and keep an eye on Giraud. Also cultivate the
society of M. Renauld fils . And thirdly, if you wish, endeavour
to cut him out with Mademoiselle Marthe. But I fear you will not
have great success.
I did not quite relish the last remark.
That reminds me, I said. I meant to ask you how you knew about
those two?
Mon ami I know human nature. Throw together a boy young Renauld
and a beautiful girl like Mademoiselle Marthe, and the result is
almost inevitable. Then, the quarrel! It was money or a woman and,
remembering L onie s description of the lad s anger, I decided on
the latter. So I made my guess and I was right.
And that was why you warned me against setting my heart on the
lady? You already suspected that she loved young Renauld?
Poirot smiled.
At any rate, I saw that she had anxious eyes. That is how
always think of Mademoiselle Daubreuil as the girl with the anxious
eyes. . . .
His voice was so grave that it impressed me uncomfortably.
What do you mean by that, Poirot?
I fancy, my friend, that we shall see before very long. But I
must start.
You ve oceans of time.
Perhaps perhaps. But I like plenty of leisure at the station. I
do not wish to rush, to hurry, to excite myself.
At all events, I said, rising, I will come and see you off.
You will do nothing of the sort. I forbid it.
He was so peremptory that I stared at him in surprise. He nodded
emphatically.
I mean it, mon ami . Au revoir! You permit that I embrace you? Ah,
no, I forget that it is not the English custom. Une poignee de
main, alors.
I felt rather at a loose end after Poirot had left me. I strolled
down the beach, and watched the bathers, without feeling energetic
enough to join them. I rather fancied that Cinderella might be
disporting herself amongst them in some wonderful costume, but I
saw no signs of her. I strolled aimlessly along the sands towards
the further end of the town. It occurred to me that, after all,
it would only be decent feeling on my part to inquire after the
girl. And it would save trouble in the end. The matter would then be
finished with. There would be no need for me to trouble about her
any further. But, if I did not go at all, she might quite possibly
come and look me up at the Villa. And that would be annoying in
every way. Decidedly it would be better to pay a short call, in
the course of which I could make it quite clear that I could do
nothing further for her in my capacity of showman.
Accordingly I left the beach, and walked inland. I soon found the
H tel du Phare, a very unpretentious building. It was annoying in
the extreme not to know the lady s name and, to save my dignity,
I decided to stroll inside and look around. Probably I should find
her in the lounge. Merlinville was a small place, you left your
hotel to go to the beach, and you left the beach to return to the
hotel. There were no other attractions. There was a Casino being
built, but it was not yet completed.
I had walked the length of the beach without seeing her, therefore
she must be in the hotel. I went in. Several people were sitting in
the tiny lounge, but my quarry was not amongst them. I looked into
some other rooms, but there was no sign of her. I waited for some
time, till my impatience got the better of me. I took the concierge
aside, and slipped five francs into his hand.
I wish to see a lady who is staying here. A young English lady,
small and dark. I am not sure of her name.
The man shook his head, and seemed to be suppressing a grin.
There is no such lady as you describe staying here.
She is American possibly, I suggested. These fellows are so stupid.
But the man continued to shake his head.
No, monsieur. There are only six or seven English and American
ladies altogether, and they are all much older than the lady you
are seeking. It is not here that you will find her, monsieur.
He was so positive that I felt doubts.
But the lady told me she was staying here.
Monsieur must have made a mistake or it is more likely the lady
did, since there has been another gentleman here inquiring for her.
What is that you say? I cried, surprised.
But yes, monsieur. A gentleman who described her just as you
have done.
What was he like?
He was a small gentleman, well dressed, very neat, very spotless,
the moustache very stiff, the head of a peculiar shape, and the
eyes green.
Poirot! So that was why he refused to let me accompany him to the
station. The impertinence of it! I would thank him not to meddle
in my concerns. Did he fancy I needed a nurse to look after me?
Thanking the man, I departed, somewhat at a loss, and still much
incensed with my meddlesome friend. I regretted that he was, for
the moment, out of reach. I should have enjoyed telling him what
I thought of his unwarranted interference. Had I not distinctly
told him that I had no intention of seeing the girl? Decidedly,
one s friends can be too zealous!
But where was the lady? I set aside my wrath, and tried to puzzle
it out. Evidently, through inadvertence, she had named the wrong
hotel. Then another thought struck me. Was it inadvertence? Or had
she deliberately withheld her name and given me the wrong address?
The more I thought about it, the more I felt convinced that this last
surmise of mine was right. For some reason or other she did not wish
to let the acquaintance ripen into friendship. And though half an
hour earlier this had been precisely my own view, I did not enjoy
having the tables turned upon me. The whole affair was profoundly
unsatisfactory, and I went up to the Villa Genevi ve in a condition
of distinct ill humour. I did not go to the house, but went up the
path to the little bench by the shed, and sat there moodily enough.
I was distracted from my thoughts by the sound of voices close
at hand. In a second or two I realized that they came, not from
the garden I was in, but from the adjoining garden of the Villa
Marguerite, and that they were approaching rapidly. A girl s voice
was speaking, a voice that I recognized as that of the beautiful
Marthe.
Ch ri , she was saying, is it really true? Are all our
troubles over.
You know it, Marthe, Jack Renauld replied. Nothing can part us
now, beloved. The last obstacle to our union is removed. Nothing
can take you from me.
Nothing? the girl murmured. Oh, Jack, Jack I am afraid.
I had moved to depart, realizing that I was quite unintentionally
eavesdropping. As I rose to my feet, I caught sight of them through
a gap in the hedge. They stood together facing me, the man s arm
round the girl, his eyes looking into hers. They were a splendid
looking couple, the dark, well knit boy, and the fair young goddess.
They seemed made for each other as they stood there, happy in spite
of the terrible tragedy that overshadowed their young lives.
But the girl s face was troubled, and Jack Renauld seemed to
recognize it, as he held her closer to him and asked:
But what are you afraid of, darling? What is there to fear now?
And then I saw the look in her eyes, the look Poirot had spoken of,
as she murmured, so that I almost guessed at the words.
I am afraid for you . . . .
I did not hear young Renauld s answer, for my attention was
distracted by an unusual appearance a little further down the
hedge. There appeared to be a brown bush there, which seemed odd,
to say the least of it, so early in the summer. I stepped along
to investigate, but, at my advance, the brown bush withdrew itself
precipitately, and faced me with a finger to its lips. It was Giraud.
Enjoining caution, he led the way round the shed until we were out
of ear shot.
What were you doing there? I asked.
Exactly what you were doing listening.
But I was not there on purpose!
Ah! said Giraud. I was.
As always, I admired the man whilst disliking him. He looked me
up and down with a sort of contemptuous disfavour.
You didn t help matters by butting in. I might have heard something
useful in a minute. What have you done with your old fossil?
M. Poirot has gone to Paris, I replied coldly.
And I can tell you, M. Giraud, that he is anything but an old
fossil. He has solved many cases that have completely baffled the
English police.
Bah! The English police! Giraud snapped his fingers
disdainfully. They must be on a level with our examining
magistrates. So he has gone to Paris, has he? Well, a good
thing. The longer he stays there, the better. But what does he
think he will find there?
I thought I read in the question a tinge of uneasiness. I drew
myself up.
That I am not at liberty to say, I said quietly.
Giraud subjected me to a piercing stare.
He has probably enough sense not to tell you , he remarked
rudely. Good afternoon. I m busy.
And with that, he turned on his heel, and left me without
ceremony. Matters seemed at a standstill at the Villa
Genevi ve. Giraud evidently did not desire my company and, from
what I had seen, it seemed fairly certain that Jack Renauld did
not either.
I went back to the town, had an enjoyable bath and returned to the
hotel. I turned in early, wondering whether the following day would
bring forth anything of interest.
I was wholly unprepared for what it did bring forth. I was
eating my petit d jeuner in the dining room, when the waiter,
who had been talking to some one outside, came back in obvious
excitement. He hesitated for a minute, fidgeting with his napkin,
and then burst out.
Monsieur will pardon me, but he is connected, is he not, with the
affair at the Villa Genevi ve?
Yes, I said eagerly. Why?
Monsieur has not heard the news, though?
What news?
That there has been another murder there last night!
What?
Leaving my breakfast, I caught up my hat and ran as fast as I
could. Another murder and Poirot away! What fatality. But who
had been murdered?
I dashed in at the gate. A group of the servants was in the drive,
talking and gesticulating. I caught hold of Fran oise.
What has happened?
Oh, monsieur! monsieur! Another death! It is terrible. There is
a curse upon the house. But yes, I say it, a curse! They should
send for M. le cur to bring some holy water. Never will I sleep
another night under that roof. It might be my turn, who knows?
She crossed herself.
Yes, I cried, but who has been killed?
Do I know me? A man a stranger. They found him up there in the
shed not a hundred yards from where they found poor Monsieur. And
that is not all. He is stabbed stabbed to the heart with the
same dagger !
14
The Second Body
Waiting for no more, I turned and ran up the path to the shed. The
two men on guard there stood aside to let me pass and, filled with
excitement, I entered.
The light was dim, the place was a mere rough wooden erection to
keep old pots and tools in. I had entered impetuously, but on the
threshold I checked myself, fascinated by the spectacle before me.
Giraud was on his hands and knees, a pocket torch in his hand with
which he was examining every inch of the ground. He looked up with
a frown at my entrance, then his face relaxed a little in a sort
of good humoured contempt.
Ah, c est l Anglais ! Enter then. Let us see what you can make
of this affair.
Rather stung by his tone, I stooped my head, and passed in.
There he is, said Giraud, flashing his torch to the far corner.
I stepped across.
The dead man lay straight upon his back. He was of medium height,
swarthy of complexion, and possibly about fifty years of age. He was
neatly dressed in a dark blue suit, well cut and probably made by
an expensive tailor, but not new. His face was terribly convulsed,
and on his left side, just over the heart, the hilt of a dagger
stood up, black and shining. I recognized it. It was the same dagger
I had seen reposing in the glass jar the preceding morning!
I m expecting the doctor any minute, explained Giraud. Although
we hardly need him. There s no doubt what the man died of. He
was stabbed to the heart, and death must have been pretty well
instantaneous.
When was it done? Last night?
Giraud shook his head.
Hardly. I don t lay down the law on medical evidence, but the
man s been dead well over twelve hours. When do you say you last
saw that dagger?
About ten o clock yesterday morning.
Then I should be inclined to fix the crime as being done not long
after that.
But people were passing and repassing this shed continually.
Giraud laughed disagreeably.
You progress to a marvel! Who told you he was killed in this shed?
Well I felt flustered. I I assumed it.
Oh, what a fine detective! Look at him, mon petit does a man
stabbed to the heart fall like that neatly with his feet together,
and his arms to his side? No. Again does a man lie down on his
back and permit himself to be stabbed without raising a hand to
defend himself? It is absurd, is it not? But see here and here
He flashed the torch along the ground. I saw curious irregular
marks in the soft dirt. He was dragged here after he was dead. Half
dragged, half carried by two people. Their tracks do not show on the
hard ground outside, and here they have been careful to obliterate
them but one of the two was a woman, my young friend.
A woman?
Yes.
But if the tracks are obliterated, how do you know?
Because, blurred as they are, the prints of the woman s shoe are
unmistakable. Also, by this And, leaning forward, he drew
something from the handle of the dagger and held it up for me to
see. It was a woman s long black hair similar to the one Poirot
had taken from the arm chair in the library.
With a slightly ironic smile he wound it round the dagger again.
We will leave things as they are as much as possible, he
explained. It pleases the examining magistrate. Eh bien , do
you notice anything else?
I was forced to shake my head.
Look at his hands.
I did. The nails were broken and discoloured, and the skin was
hard. It hardly enlightened me as much as I should have liked it
to have done. I looked up at Giraud.
They are not the hands of a gentleman, he said, answering my
look. On the contrary his clothes are those of a well to do
man. That is curious, is it not?
Very curious, I agreed.
And none of his clothing is marked. What do we learn from that? This
man was trying to pass himself off as other than he was. He was
masquerading. Why? Did he fear something? Was he trying to escape
by disguising himself? As yet we do not know, but one thing we
do know he was as anxious to conceal his identity as we are to
discover it.
He looked down at the body again.
As before there are no finger prints on the handle of the
dagger. The murderer again wore gloves.
You think, then, that the murderer was the same in both cases? I
asked eagerly.
Giraud became inscrutable.
Never mind what I think. We shall see. Marchaud!
The sergent de ville appeared at the doorway.
Monsieur?
Why is Madame Renauld not here? I sent for her a quarter of an
hour ago?
She is coming up the path now, monsieur, and her son with her.
Good. I only want one at a time, though.
Marchaud saluted and disappeared again. A moment later he reappeared
with Mrs. Renauld.
Here is Madame.
Giraud came forward with a curt bow.
This way, madame. He led her across, and then, standing suddenly
aside. Here is the man. Do you know him?
And as he spoke, his eyes, gimlet like, bored into her face,
seeking to read her mind, noting every indication of her manner.
But Mrs. Renauld remained perfectly calm too calm, I felt. She
looked down at the corpse almost without interest, certainly without
any sign of agitation or recognition.
No, she said. I have never seen him in my life. He is quite a
stranger to me.
You are sure?
Quite sure.
You do not recognize in him one of your assailants, for instance?
No, she seemed to hesitate, as though struck by the idea. No, I do
not think so. Of course they wore beards false ones the examining
magistrate thought, but still no. Now she seemed to make her mind
up definitely. I am sure neither of the two was this man.
Very well, madame. That is all, then.
She stepped out with head erect, the sun flashing on the silver
threads in her hair. Jack Renauld succeeded her. He, too, failed
to identify the man, in a completely natural manner.
Giraud merely grunted. Whether he was pleased or chagrined I could
not tell. He merely called to Marchaud:
You have got the other there?
Yes, monsieur.
Bring her in then.
The other was Madame Daubreuil. She came indignantly, protesting
with vehemence.
I object, monsieur! This is an outrage! What have I to do with
all this?
Madame, said Giraud brutally, I am investigating not one murder,
but two murders! For all I know you may have committed them both.
How dare you? she cried. How dare you insult me by such a wild
accusation! It is infamous.
Infamous, is it? What about this? Stooping, he again detached
the hair, and held it up. Do you see this, madame? He advanced
towards her. You permit that I see whether it matches?
With a cry she started backwards, white to the lips.
It is false I swear it. I know nothing of the crime of either
crime. Any one who says I do lies! Ah! mon Dieu , what shall I do?
Calm yourself, madame, said Giraud coldly. No one has accused
you as yet. But you will do well to answer my questions without
more ado.
Anything you wish, monsieur.
Look at the dead man. Have you ever seen him before?
Drawing nearer, a little of the colour creeping back to her face,
Madame Daubreuil looked down at the victim with a certain amount
of interest and curiosity. Then she shook her head.
I do not know him.
It seemed impossible to doubt her, the words came so
naturally. Giraud dismissed her with a nod of the head. You are
letting her go? I asked in a low voice. Is that wise? Surely that
black hair is from her head.
I do not need teaching my business, said Giraud dryly. She is
under surveillance. I have no wish to arrest her as yet.
Then, frowning, he gazed down at the body.
Should you say that was a Spanish type at all? he asked suddenly.
I considered the face carefully.
No, I said at last. I should put him down as a Frenchman most
decidedly.
Giraud gave a grunt of dissatisfaction.
Same here.
He stood there for a moment, then with an imperative gesture he
waved me aside, and once more, on hands and knees, he continued
his search of the floor of the shed. He was marvellous. Nothing
escaped him. Inch by inch he went over the floor, turning over
pots, examining old sacks. He pounced on a bundle by the door,
but it proved to be only a ragged coat and trousers, and he flung
it down again with a snarl. Two pairs of old gloves interested him,
but in the end he shook his head and laid them aside. Then he went
back to the pots, methodically turning them over one by one. In
the end, he rose to his feet, and shook his head thoughtfully. He
seemed baffled and perplexed. I think he had forgotten my presence.
But, at that moment, a stir and bustle was heard outside, and our
old friend, the examining magistrate, accompanied by his clerk and
M. Bex, with the doctor behind him, came bustling in.
But this is extraordinary, Mr. Giraud, cried M. Hautet. Another
crime! Ah, we have not got to the bottom of this case. There is
some deep mystery here. But who is the victim this time?
That is just what nobody can tell us, M. le juge. He has not
been identified.
Where is the body? asked the doctor.
Giraud moved aside a little.
There in the corner. He has been stabbed to the heart, as you
see. And with the dagger that was stolen yesterday morning. I fancy
that the murder followed hard upon the theft but that is for you
to say. You can handle the dagger freely there are no finger prints
on it.
The doctor knelt down by the dead man, and Giraud turned to the
examining magistrate.
A pretty little problem, is it not? But I shall solve it.
And so no one can identify him, mused the magistrate. Could it
possibly be one of the assassins? They may have fallen out among
themselves.
Giraud shook his head.
The man is a Frenchman I would take my oath of that
But at that moment they were interrupted by the doctor who was
sitting back on his heels with a perplexed expression.
You say he was killed yesterday morning?
I fix it by the theft of the dagger, explained Giraud. He may,
of course, have been killed later in the day.
Later in the day? Fiddlesticks! This man has been dead at least
forty eight hours, and probably longer.
We stared at each other in blank amazement.
15
A Photograph
The doctor s words were so surprising that we were all momentarily
taken aback. Here was a man stabbed with a dagger which we knew
to have been stolen only twenty four hours previously, and yet
Dr. Durand asserted positively that he had been dead at least
forty eight hours! The whole thing was fantastic to the last extreme.
We were still recovering from the surprise of the doctor s
announcement, when a telegram was brought to me. It had been sent up
from the hotel to the Villa. I tore it open. It was from Poirot, and
announced his return by the train arriving at Merlinville at 12:28.
I looked at my watch and saw that I had just time to get comfortably
to the station and meet him there. I felt that it was of the utmost
importance that he should know at once of the new and startling
developments in the case.
Evidently, I reflected, Poirot had had no difficulty in finding what
he wanted in Paris. The quickness of his return proved that. Very
few hours had sufficed. I wondered how he would take the exciting
news I had to impart.
The train was some minutes late, and I strolled aimlessly up and
down the platform, until it occurred to me that I might pass the
time by asking a few questions as to who had left Merlinville by
the last train on the evening of the tragedy.
I approached the chief porter, an intelligent looking man, and had
little difficulty in persuading him to enter upon the subject. It was
a disgrace to the Police, he hotly affirmed, that such brigands of
assassins should be allowed to go about unpunished. I hinted that
there was some possibility they might have left by the midnight
train, but he negatived the idea decidedly. He would have noticed
two foreigners he was sure of it. Only about twenty people had
left by the train, and he could not have failed to observe them.
I do not know what put the idea into my head possibly it was
the deep anxiety underlying Marthe Daubreuil s tones but I asked
suddenly:
Young M. Renauld he did not leave by that train, did he?
Ah, no, monsieur. To arrive and start off again within half an hour,
it would not be amusing, that!
I stared at the man, the significance of his words almost escaping
me. Then I saw. . . .
You mean, I said, my heart beating a little, that M. Jack Renauld
arrived at Merlinville that evening?
But yes, monsieur. By the last train arriving the other way,
the 11:40.
My brain whirled. That, then, was the reason of Marthe s poignant
anxiety. Jack Renauld had been in Merlinville on the night of the
crime! But why had he not said so? Why, on the contrary, had he led
us to believe that he had remained in Cherbourg? Remembering his
frank boyish countenance, I could hardly bring myself to believe
that he had any connection with the crime. Yet why this silence
on his part about so vital a matter? One thing was certain, Marthe
had known all along. Hence her anxiety, and her eager questioning
of Poirot to know whether any one were suspected.
My cogitations were interrupted by the arrival of the train,
and in another moment I was greeting Poirot. The little man was
radiant. He beamed and vociferated and, forgetting my English
reluctance, embraced me warmly on the platform.
Mon cher ami , I have succeeded but succeeded to a marvel!
Indeed? I m delighted to hear it. Have you heard the latest here?
How would you that I should hear anything? There have been some
developments, eh? The brave Giraud, he has made an arrest? Or
even arrests perhaps? Ah, but I will make him look foolish, that
one! But where are you taking me, my friend? Do we not go to the
hotel? It is necessary that I attend to my moustaches they are
deplorably limp from the heat of travelling. Also, without doubt,
there is dust on my coat. And my tie, that I must rearrange.
I cut short his remonstrances.
My dear Poirot never mind all that. We must go to the Villa at
once. There has been another murder!
I have frequently been disappointed when fancying that I was giving
news of importance to my friend. Either he has known it already
or he has dismissed it as irrelevant to the main issue and in the
latter case events have usually proved him justified. But this time
I could not complain of missing my effect. Never have I seen a man
so flabbergasted. His jaw dropped. All the jauntiness went out of
his bearing. He stared at me open mouthed.
What is that you say? Another murder? Ah, then, I am all wrong. I
have failed. Giraud may mock himself at me he will have reason!
You did not expect it, then?
I? Not the least in the world. It demolishes my theory it ruins
everything it ah, no! He stopped dead, thumping himself on
the chest. It is impossible. I cannot be wrong! The facts,
taken methodically and in their proper order admit of only one
explanation. I must be right! I am right!
But then
He interrupted me.
Wait, my friend. I must be right, therefore this new murder is
impossible unless unless oh, wait, I implore you. Say no word
He was silent for a moment or two, then, resuming his normal
manner, he said in a quiet assured voice: The victim is a man of
middle age. His body was found in the locked shed near the scene
of the crime and had been dead at least forty eight hours. And
it is most probable that he was stabbed in a similar manner to M.
Renauld, though not necessarily in the back.
It was my turn to gape and gape I did. In all my knowledge of
Poirot he had never done anything so amazing as this. And, almost
inevitably, a doubt crossed my mind.
Poirot, I cried, you re pulling my leg. You ve heard all about
it already.
He turned his earnest gaze upon me reproachfully.
Would I do such a thing? I assure you that I have heard nothing
whatsoever. Did you not observe the shock your news was to me?
But how on earth could you know all that?
I was right then? But I knew it. The little grey cells, my friend,
the little grey cells! They told me. Thus, and in no other way, could
there have been a second death. Now tell me all. If we go round to
the left here, we can take a short cut across the golf links which
will bring us to the back of the Villa Genevi ve much more quickly.
As we walked, taking the way he had indicated, I recounted all I
knew. Poirot listened attentively.
The dagger was in the wound, you say? That is curious. You are
sure it was the same one?
Absolutely certain. That s what make it so impossible.
Nothing is impossible. There may have been two daggers.
I raised my eyebrows.
Surely that is in the highest degree unlikely? It would be a most
extraordinary coincidence.
You speak as usual, without reflection, Hastings. In some cases
two identical weapons would be highly improbable. But not
here. This particular weapon was a war souvenir which was made
to Jack Renauld s orders. It is really highly unlikely, when you
come to think of it, that he should have had only one made. Very
probably he would have another for his own use.
But nobody has mentioned such a thing, I objected.
A hint of the lecturer crept into Poirot s tone. My friend,
in working upon a case, one does not take into account only the
things that are mentioned. There is no reason to mention many
things which may be important. Equally, there is often an excellent
reason for not mentioning them. You can take your choice of the
two motives.
I was silent, impressed in spite of myself. Another few minutes
brought us to the famous shed. We found all our friends there and,
after an interchange of polite amenities, Poirot began his task.
Having watched Giraud at work, I was keenly interested. Poirot
bestowed but a cursory glance on the surroundings. The only
thing he examined was the ragged coat and trousers by the door. A
disdainful smile rose to Giraud s lips, and, as though noting it,
Poirot flung the bundle down again.
Old clothes of the gardener s? he queried.
Exactly, said Giraud.
Poirot knelt down by the body. His fingers were rapid but
methodical. He examined the texture of the clothes, and satisfied
himself that there were no marks on them. The boots he subjected
to special care, also the dirty and broken finger nails. Whilst
examining the latter he threw a quick question at Giraud.
You saw these?
Yes, I saw them, replied the other. His face remained inscrutable.
Suddenly Poirot stiffened.
Dr. Durand!
Yes? The doctor came forward.
There is foam on the lips. You observed it?
I didn t notice it, I must admit.
But you observe it now?
Oh, certainly.
Poirot again shot a question at Giraud.
You noticed it without doubt?
The other did not reply. Poirot proceeded. The dagger had been
withdrawn from the wound. It reposed in a glass jar by the side of
the body. Poirot examined it, then he studied the wound closely. When
he looked up, his eyes were excited, and shone with the green light
I knew so well.
It is a strange wound, this! It has not bled. There is no stain
on the clothes. The blade of the dagger is slightly discoloured,
that is all. What do you think, M. le docteur?
I can only say that it is most abnormal.
It is not abnormal at all. It is most simple. The man was stabbed
after he was dead . And, stilling the clamour of voices that
arose with a wave of his hand, Poirot turned to Giraud and added,
M. Giraud agrees with me, do you not, monsieur?
Whatever Giraud s real belief, he accepted the position without
moving a muscle. Calmly and almost scornfully he replied:
Certainly I agree.
The murmur of surprise and interest broke out again.
But what an idea! cried M. Hautet. To stab a man after he is
dead! Barbaric! Unheard of! Some unappeasable hate, perhaps.
No, M. le juge, said Poirot. I should fancy it was done quite
cold bloodedly to create an impression.
What impression?
The impression it nearly did create, returned Poirot oracularly.
M. Bex had been thinking.
How, then, was the man killed?
He was not killed. He died. He died, M. le juge, if I am not much
mistaken, of an epileptic fit!
This statement of Poirot s again aroused considerable
excitement. Dr. Durand knelt down again, and made a searching
examination. At last he rose to his feet.
Well, M. le docteur?
M. Poirot, I am inclined to believe that you are correct in your
assertion. I was misled to begin with. The incontrovertible fact
that the man had been stabbed distracted my attention from any
other indications.
Poirot was the hero of the hour. The examining magistrate was profuse
in compliments. Poirot responded gracefully, and then excused himself
on the pretext that neither he nor I had yet lunched, and that he
wished to repair the ravages of the journey. As we were about to
leave the shed, Giraud approached us.
One more thing, M. Poirot, he said, in his suave mocking voice. We
found this coiled round the handle of the dagger. A woman s hair.
Ah! said Poirot. A woman s hair? What woman s, I wonder?
I wonder also, said Giraud. Then, with a bow, he left us.
He was insistent, the good Giraud, said Poirot thoughtfully, as
we walked towards the hotel. I wonder in what direction he hopes
to mislead me? A woman s hair h m!
We lunched heartily, but I found Poirot somewhat distrait and
inattentive. Afterwards we went up to our sitting room and there
I begged him to tell me something of his mysterious journey to Paris.
Willingly, my friend. I went to Paris to find this .
He took from his pocket a small faded newspaper cutting. It was
the reproduction of a woman s photograph. He handed it to me. I
uttered an exclamation.
You recognize it, my friend?
I nodded. Although the photo obviously dated from very many years
back, and the hair was dressed in a different style, the likeness
was unmistakable.
Madame Daubreuil! I exclaimed.
Poirot shook his head with a smile.
Not quite correct, my friend. She did not call herself by that name
in those days. That is a picture of the notorious Madame Beroldy!
Madame Beroldy! In a flash the whole thing came back to me. The
murder trial that had evoked such world wide interest.
The Beroldy Case.
16
The Beroldy Case
Some twenty years or so before the opening of the present story,
Monsieur Arnold Beroldy, a native of Lyons, arrived in Paris
accompanied by his pretty wife and their little daughter, a mere
babe. Monsieur Beroldy was a junior partner in a firm of wine
merchants, a stout middle aged man, fond of the good things of life,
devoted to his charming wife, and altogether unremarkable in every
way. The firm in which Monsieur Beroldy was a partner was a small
one, and although doing well, it did not yield a large income to
the junior partner. The Beroldys had a small apartment and lived
in a very modest fashion to begin with.
But unremarkable though Monsieur Beroldy might be, his wife was
plentifully gilded with the brush of Romance. Young and good looking,
and gifted withal with a singular charm of manner, Madame Beroldy
at once created a stir in the quarter, especially when it began to
be whispered that some interesting mystery surrounded her birth. It
was rumoured that she was the illegitimate daughter of a Russian
Grand Duke. Others asserted that it was an Austrian Archduke, and
that the union was legal, though morganatic. But all stories agreed
upon one point, that Jeanne Beroldy was the centre of an interesting
mystery. Questioned by the curious, Madame Beroldy did not deny these
rumours. On the other hand she let it be clearly understood that,
though her lips were sealed, all these stories had a foundation
in fact. To intimate friends she unburdened herself further,
spoke of political intrigues, of papers, of obscure dangers that
threatened her. There was also much talk of Crown jewels that were
to be sold secretly, with herself acting as the go between.
Amongst the friends and acquaintances of the Beroldys was a
young lawyer, Georges Conneau. It was soon evident that the
fascinating Jeanne had completely enslaved his heart. Madame
Beroldy encouraged the young man in a discreet fashion, but being
always careful to affirm her complete devotion to her middle aged
husband. Nevertheless, many spiteful persons did not hesitate to
declare that young Conneau was her lover and not the only one!
When the Beroldys had been in Paris about three months, another
personage came upon the scene. This was Mr. Hiram P. Trapp, a
native of the United States, and extremely wealthy. Introduced
to the charming and mysterious Madame Beroldy, he fell a prompt
victim to her fascinations. His admiration was obvious, though
strictly respectful.
About this time, Madame Beroldy became more outspoken in her
confidences. To several friends, she declared herself greatly worried
on her husband s behalf. She explained that he had been drawn into
several schemes of a political nature, and also referred to some
important papers that had been entrusted to him for safekeeping and
which concerned a secret of far reaching European importance. They
had been entrusted to his custody to throw pursuers off the track,
but Madame Beroldy was nervous, having recognized several important
members of the Revolutionary Circle in Paris.
On the 28th day of November, the blow fell. The woman who came daily
to clean and cook for the Beroldys was surprised to find the door of
the apartment standing wide open. Hearing faint moans issuing from
the bedroom, she went in. A terrible sight met her eyes. Madame
Beroldy lay on the floor, bound hand and foot, uttering feeble
moans, having managed to free her mouth from a gag. On the bed was
Monsieur Beroldy, lying in a pool of blood, with a knife driven
through his heart.
Madame Beroldy s story was clear enough. Suddenly awakened from
sleep, she had discerned two masked men bending over her. Stifling
her cries, they had bound and gagged her. They had then demanded
of Monsieur Beroldy the famous secret.
But the intrepid wine merchant refused point blank to accede to
their request. Angered by his refusal, one of the men incontinently
stabbed him through the heart. With the dead man s keys, they had
opened the safe in the corner, and had carried away with them a
mass of papers. Both men were heavily bearded, and had worn masks,
but Madame Beroldy declared positively that they were Russians.
The affair created an immense sensation. It was referred to variously
as the Nihilist Atrocity, Revolutionaries in Paris, and the
Russian Mystery. Time went on, and the mysterious bearded men
were never traced. And then, just as public interest was beginning
to die down, a startling development occurred. Madame Beroldy was
arrested and charged with the murder of her husband.
The trial, when it came on, aroused widespread interest.
The youth and beauty of the accused, and her mysterious history,
were sufficient to make of it a cause c l bre. People ranged
themselves wildly for or against the prisoner. But her partisans
received several severe checks to their enthusiasm. The romantic past
of Madame Beroldy, her royal blood, and the mysterious intrigues
in which she had her being were shown to be mere fantasies of
the imagination.
It was proved beyond doubt that Jeanne Beroldy s parents were
a highly respectable and prosaic couple, fruit merchants,
who lived on the outskirts of Lyons. The Russian Grand Duke,
the court intrigues, and the political schemes all the stories
current were traced back to the lady herself! From her brain had
emanated these ingenious myths, and she was proved to have raised
a considerable sum of money from various credulous persons by her
fiction of the Crown jewels the jewels in question being found
to be mere paste imitations. Remorselessly the whole story of
her life was laid bare. The motive for the murder was found in Mr.
Hiram P. Trapp. Mr. Trapp did his best, but relentlessly and agilely
cross questioned he was forced to admit that he loved the lady,
and that, had she been free, he would have asked her to be his
wife. The fact that the relations between them were admittedly
platonic strengthened the case against the accused. Debarred from
becoming his mistress by the simple honourable nature of the man,
Jeanne Beroldy had conceived the monstrous project of ridding
herself of her elderly undistinguished husband, and becoming the
wife of the rich American.
Throughout, Madame Beroldy confronted her accusers with complete sang
froid and self possession. Her story never varied. She continued
to declare strenuously that she was of royal birth, and that she
had been substituted for the daughter of the fruit seller at an
early age. Absurd and completely unsubstantiated as these statements
were, a great number of people believed implicitly in their truth.
But the prosecution was implacable. It denounced the masked
Russians as a myth, and asserted that the crime had been committed
by Madame Beroldy and her lover, Georges Conneau. A warrant was
issued for the arrest of the latter, but he had wisely disappeared.
Evidence showed that the bonds which secured Madame Beroldy were
so loose that she could easily have freed herself.
And then, towards the close of the trial, a letter, posted in Paris,
was sent to the Public Prosecutor. It was from Georges Conneau and,
without revealing his whereabouts, it contained a full confession
of the crime. He declared that he had indeed struck the fatal blow
at Madame Beroldy s instigation. The crime had been planned between
them. Believing that her husband ill treated her, and maddened by
his own passion for her, a passion which he believed her to return,
he had planned the crime and struck the fatal blow that should free
the woman he loved from a hateful bondage. Now, for the first time,
he learnt of Mr. Hiram P. Trapp, and realized that the woman he loved
had betrayed him! Not for his sake did she wish to be free but in
order to marry the wealthy American. She had used him as a cat s paw,
and now, in his jealous rage, he turned and denounced her, declaring
that throughout he had acted at her instigation.
And then Madame Beroldy proved herself the remarkable woman she
undoubtedly was. Without hesitation, she dropped her previous
defence, and admitted that the Russians were a pure invention
on her part. The real murderer was Georges Conneau. Maddened by
passion, he had committed the crime, vowing that if she did not keep
silence he would enact a terrible vengeance from her. Terrified by
his threats, she had consented also fearing it likely that if she
told the truth she might be accused of conniving at the crime. But
she had steadfastly refused to have anything more to do with her
husband s murderer, and it was in revenge for this attitude on
her part that he had written this letter accusing her. She swore
solemnly that she had had nothing to do with the planning of the
crime, that she had awoke on that memorable night to find Georges
Conneau standing over her, the blood stained knife in his hand.
It was a touch and go affair. Madame Beroldy s story was hardly
credible. But this woman, whose fairy tales of royal intrigues had
been so easily accepted, had the supreme art of making herself
believed. Her address to the jury was a masterpiece. The tears
streaming down her face, she spoke of her child, of her woman s
honour of her desire to keep her reputation untarnished for
the child s sake. She admitted that, Georges Conneau having been
her lover, she might perhaps be held morally responsible for
the crime but, before God, nothing more! She knew that she had
committed a grave fault in not denouncing Conneau to the law, but
she declared in a broken voice that that was a thing no woman could
have done. . . . She had loved him! Could she let her hand be the
one to send him to the Guillotine? She had been guilty of much,
but she was innocent of the terrible crime imputed to her.
However that may have been, her eloquence and personality won the
day. Madame Beroldy, amidst a scene of unparalleled excitement,
was acquitted. Despite the utmost endeavours of the police, Georges
Conneau was never traced. As for Madame Beroldy, nothing more was
heard of her. Taking the child with her, she left Paris to begin
a new life.
17
We Make Further Investigations
I have set down the Beroldy case in full. Of course all the details
did not present themselves to my memory as I have recounted them
here. Nevertheless, I recalled the case fairly accurately. It had
attracted a great deal of interest at the time, and had been fully
reported by the English papers, so that it did not need much effort
of memory on my part to recollect the salient details.
Just for the moment, in my excitement, it seemed to clear up the
whole matter. I admit that I am impulsive, and Poirot deplores my
custom of jumping to conclusions, but I think I had some excuse in
this instance. The remarkable way in which this discovery justified
Poirot s point of view struck me at once.
Poirot, I said, I congratulate you. I see everything now.
If that is indeed the truth, I congratulate you , mon ami . For
as a rule you are not famous for seeing eh, is it not so?
I felt a little annoyed.
Come now, don t rub it in. You ve been so confoundedly mysterious
all along with your hints and your insignificant details that any
one might fail to see what you were driving at.
Poirot lit one of his little cigarettes with his usual
precision. Then he looked up.
And since you see everything now, mon ami , what exactly is it
that you see?
Why, that it was Madame Daubreuil Beroldy, who murdered
Mr. Renauld. The similarity of the two cases proves that beyond
a doubt.
Then you consider that Madame Beroldy was wrongly acquitted? That
in actual fact she was guilty of connivance in her husband s murder?
I opened my eyes wide.
But of course! Don t you?
Poirot walked to the end of the room, absentmindedly straightened
a chair, and then said thoughtfully.
Yes, that is my opinion. But there is no of course about it,
my friend. Technically speaking, Madame Beroldy is innocent.
Of that crime, perhaps. But not of this.
Poirot sat down again, and regarded me, his thoughtful air more
marked than ever.
So it is definitely your opinion, Hastings, that Madame Daubreuil
murdered M. Renauld?
Yes.
Why?
He shot the question at me with such suddenness that I was taken
aback.
Why? I stammered. Why? Oh, because I came to a stop.
Poirot nodded his head at me.
You see, you come to a stumbling block at once. Why should
Madame Daubreuil I shall call her that for clearness sake murder
M. Renauld? We can find no shadow of a motive. She does not benefit
by his death; considered as either mistress or blackmailer she stands
to lose. You cannot have a murder without a motive. The first crime
was different, there we had a rich lover waiting to step into her
husband s shoes.
Money is not the only motive for murder, I objected.
True, agreed Poirot placidly. There are two others, the crime
passionnel is one. And there is the third rare motive, murder for
an idea which implies some form of mental derangement on the part
of the murderer. Homicidal mania, and religious fanaticism belong
to that class. We can rule it out here.
But what about the crime passionnel ? Can you rule that out? If
Madame Daubreuil was Renauld s mistress, if she found that his
affection was cooling, or if her jealousy was aroused in any way,
might she not have struck him down in a moment of anger?
Poirot shook his head.
If I say if , you note Madame Daubreuil was Renauld s mistress,
he had not had time to tire of her. And in any case you mistake
her character. She is a woman who can simulate great emotional
stress. She is a magnificent actress. But, looked at dispassionately,
her life disproves her appearance. Throughout, if we examine it,
she had been cold blooded and calculating in her motives and
actions. It was not to link her life with that of her young lover
that she connived at her husband s murder. The rich American, for
whom she probably did not care a button, was her objective. If she
committed a crime, she would always do so for gain. Here there
was no gain. Besides, how do you account for the digging of the
grave? That was a man s work.
She might have had an accomplice, I suggested, unwilling to
relinquish my belief.
I pass to another objection. You have spoken of the similarity
between the two crimes. Wherein does that lie, my friend?
I stared at him in astonishment.
Why, Poirot, it was you who remarked on that! The story of the
masked men, the secret, the papers!
Poirot smiled a little.
Do not be so indignant, I beg of you. I repudiate nothing. The
similarity of the two stories links the two cases together
inevitably. But reflect now on something very curious. It is not
Madame Daubreuil who tells us this tale if it were all would indeed
be plain sailing it is Madame Renauld. Is she then in league with
the other?
I can t believe that, I said slowly. If it is so, she must be
the most consummate actress the world has ever known.
Ta ta ta, said Poirot impatiently. Again you have the sentiment,
and not the logic! If it is necessary for a criminal to be a
consummate actress, then by all means assume her to be one. But is
it necessary? I do not believe Madame Renauld to be in league with
Madame Daubreuil for several reasons, some of which I have already
enumerated to you. The others are self evident. Therefore, that
possibility eliminated, we draw very near to the truth which is,
as always, very curious and interesting.
Poirot, I cried, what more do you know?
Mon ami , you must make your own deductions. You have access to
the facts! Concentrate your grey cells. Reason not like Giraud but
like Hercule Poirot.
But are you sure ?
My friend, in many ways I have been an imbecile. But at last I
see clearly.
You know everything?
I have discovered what M. Renauld sent for me to discover.
And you know the murderer?
I know one murderer.
What do you mean?
We talk a little at cross purposes. There are here not one crime,
but two. The first I have solved, the second eh bien , I will
confess, I am not sure!
But, Poirot, I thought you said the man in the shed had died a
natural death?
Ta ta ta. Poirot made his favourite ejaculation of
impatience. Still you do not understand. One may have a crime
without a murderer, but for two crimes it is essential to have
two bodies.
His remark struck me as so peculiarly lacking in lucidity that
I looked at him in some anxiety. But he appeared perfectly
normal. Suddenly he rose and strolled to the window.
Here he is, he observed.
Who?
M. Jack Renauld. I sent a note up to the Villa to ask him to
come here.
That changed the course of my ideas, and I asked Poirot if he
knew that Jack Renauld had been in Merlinville on the night of the
crime. I had hoped to catch my astute little friend napping, but
as usual, he was omniscient. He, too, had inquired at the station.
And without doubt we are not original in the idea, Hastings. The
excellent Giraud, he also has probably made his inquiries.
You don t think I said, and then stopped. Ah, no, it would be
too horrible!
Poirot looked inquiringly at me, but I said no more. It had
just occurred to me that though there were seven women directly or
indirectly connected with the case Mrs. Renauld, Madame Daubreuil and
her daughter, the mysterious visitor, and the three servants there
was, with the exception of old Auguste who could hardly count,
only one man Jack Renauld. And a man must have dug a grave. . . .
I had no time to develop further the appalling idea that had occurred
to me, for Jack Renauld was ushered into the room.
Poirot greeted him in a business like manner.
Take a seat, monsieur. I regret infinitely to derange you, but
you will perhaps understand that the atmosphere of the Villa is
not too congenial to me. M. Giraud and I do not see eye to eye
about everything. His politeness to me has not been striking and
you will comprehend that I do not intend any little discoveries I
may make to benefit him in any way.
Exactly, M. Poirot, said the lad. That fellow Giraud is an
ill conditioned brute, and I d be delighted to see some one score
at his expense.
Then I may ask a little favour of you?
Certainly.
I will ask you to go to the railway station and take a train to the
next station along the line, Abbalac. Ask there at the cloak room
whether two foreigners deposited a valise there on the night of
the murder. It is a small station, and they are almost certain
to remember. Will you do this?
Of course I will, said the boy, mystified, though ready for
the task.
I and my friend, you comprehend, have business elsewhere, explained
Poirot. There is a train in a quarter of an hour, and I will ask
you not to return to the Villa, as I have no wish for Giraud to
get an inkling of your errand.
Very well, I will go straight to the station.
He rose to his feet. Poirot s voice stopped him.
One moment, M. Renauld, there is one little matter that puzzles
me. Why did you not mention to M. Hautet this morning that you were
in Merlinville on the night of the crime?
Jack Renauld s face went crimson. With an effort he controlled
himself.
You have made a mistake. I was in Cherbourg, as I told the examining
magistrate this morning.
Poirot looked at him, his eyes narrowed, cat like, until they only
showed a gleam of green.
Then it is a singular mistake that I have made there for it is
shared by the station staff. They say you arrived by the 11:40
train.
For a moment Jack Renauld hesitated, then he made up his mind.
And if I did? I suppose you do not mean to accuse me of
participating in my father s murder? He asked the question
haughtily, his head thrown back.
I should like an explanation of the reason that brought you here.
That is simple enough. I came to see my fianc e, Mademoiselle
Daubreuil. I was on the eve of a long voyage, uncertain as to when
I should return. I wished to see her before I went, to assure her
of my unchanging devotion.
And you did see her? Poirot s eyes never left the other s face.
There was an appreciable pause before Renauld replied. Then he said:
Yes.
And afterwards?
I found I had missed the last train. I walked to St. Beauvais where
I knocked up a garage and got a car to take me back to Cherbourg.
St. Beauvais? That is fifteen kilometres. A long walk, M. Renauld.
I I felt like walking.
Poirot bowed his head as a sign that he accepted the
explanation. Jack Renauld took up his hat and cane and departed. In
a trice Poirot jumped to his feet.
Quick, Hastings. We will go after him.
Keeping a discreet distance behind our quarry, we followed him
through the streets of Merlinville. But when Poirot saw that he
took the turning to the station, he checked himself.
All is well. He has taken the bait. He will go to Abbalac, and will
inquire for the mythical valise left by the mythical foreigners. Yes,
mon ami , all that was a little invention of my own.
You wanted him out of the way! I exclaimed.
Your penetration is amazing, Hastings! Now, if you please, we will
go up to the Villa Genevi ve.
18
Giraud Acts
By the way, Poirot, I said, as we walked along the hot white
road, I ve got a bone to pick with you. I dare say you meant well,
but really it was no business of yours to go mouching round to the
H tel du Phare without letting me know.
Poirot shot a quick sidelong glance at me.
And how did you know I had been there? he inquired.
Much to my annoyance I felt the colour rising in my cheeks.
I happened to look in in passing, I explained with as much dignity
as I could muster.
I rather feared Poirot s banter, but to my relief, and somewhat to
my surprise, he only shook his head with a rather unusual gravity.
If I have offended your susceptibilities in any way, I demand
pardon of you. You will understand better soon. But, believe me,
I have striven to concentrate all my energies on the case.
Oh, it s all right, I said, mollified by the apology. I know
it s only that you have my interests at heart. But I can take care
of myself all right.
Poirot seemed to be about to say something further, but checked
himself.
Arrived at the Villa, Poirot led the way up to the shed where the
second body had been discovered. He did not, however, go in, but
paused by the bench which I have mentioned before as being set some
few yards away from it. After contemplating it for a moment or two,
he paced carefully from it to the hedge which marked the boundary
between the Villa Genevi ve and the Villa Marguerite. Then he
paced back again, nodding his head as he did so. Returning again
to the hedge, he parted the bushes with his hands.
With good fortune, he remarked to me over his shoulder,
Mademoiselle Marthe may find herself in the garden. I desire
to speak to her and would prefer not to call formally at
the Villa Marguerite. Ah, all is well, there she is. Pst,
mademoiselle! Pst! Un moment, s il vous pla t .
I joined him at the moment that Marthe Daubreuil, looking slightly
startled, came running up to the hedge at his call.
A little word with you, mademoiselle, if it is permitted?
Certainly, Monsieur Poirot.
Despite her acquiescence, her eyes looked troubled and afraid.
Mademoiselle, do you remember running after me on the road the
day that I came to your house with the examining magistrate? You
asked me if any one were suspected of the crime.
And you told me two Chilians. Her voice sounded rather breathless,
and her left hand stole to her breast.
Will you ask me the same question again, mademoiselle?
What do you mean?
This. If you were to ask me that question again, I should give
you a different answer. Some one is suspected but not a Chilian.
Who? The word came faintly between her parted lips.
M. Jack Renauld.
What? It was a cry. Jack? Impossible. Who dares to suspect him?
Giraud.
Giraud! The girl s face was ashy. I am afraid of that man. He
is cruel. He will he will She broke off. There was courage
gathering in her face, and determination. I realized in that moment
that she was a fighter. Poirot, too, watched her intently.
You know, of course, that he was here on the night of the
murder? he asked.
Yes, she replied mechanically. He told me.
It was unwise to have tried to conceal the fact, ventured Poirot.
Yes, yes, she replied impatiently. But we cannot waste time
on regrets. We must find something to save him. He is innocent,
of course, but that will not help him with a man like Giraud who
has his reputation to think of. He must arrest some one, and that
some one will be Jack.
The facts will tell against him, said Poirot. You realize that?
She faced him squarely, and used the words I had heard her say in
her mother s drawing room.
I am not a child, monsieur. I can be brave and look facts in the
face. He is innocent, and we must save him.
She spoke with a kind of desperate energy, then was silent, frowning
as she thought.
Mademoiselle, said Poirot observing her keenly, is there not
something that you are keeping back that you could tell us?
She nodded perplexedly.
Yes, there is something, but I hardly know whether you will believe
it it seems so absurd.
At any rate, tell us, mademoiselle.
It is this. M. Giraud sent for me, as an afterthought, to see if I
could identify the man in there. She signed with her head towards
the shed. I could not. At least I could not at the moment. But
since I have been thinking
Well?
It seems so queer, and yet I am almost sure. I will tell you. On
the morning of the day M. Renauld was murdered, I was walking in the
garden here, when I heard a sound of men s voices quarrelling. I
pushed aside the bushes and looked through. One of the men was
M. Renauld and the other was a tramp, a dreadful looking creature in
filthy rags. He was alternately whining and threatening. I gathered
he was asking for money, but at that moment maman called me from
the house, and I had to go. That is all, only I am almost sure
that the tramp and the dead man in the shed are one and the same.
Poirot uttered an exclamation.
But why did you not say so at the time, mademoiselle?
Because at first it only struck me that the face was vaguely
familiar in some way. The man was differently dressed, and apparently
belonged to a superior station in life. But tell me, Monsieur Poirot,
is it not possible that this tramp might have attacked and killed M.
Renauld, and taken his clothes and money?
It is an idea, mademoiselle, said Poirot slowly. It leaves a
lot unexplained, but it is certainly an idea. I will think of it.
A voice called from the house.
Maman , whispered Marthe, I must go. And she slipped away
through the trees.
Come, said Poirot, and taking my arm, turned in the direction of
the Villa.
What do you really think? I asked, in some curiosity. Was that
story true, or did the girl make it up in order to divert suspicion
from her lover?
It is a curious tale, said Poirot, but I believe it to be the
absolute truth. Unwittingly, Mademoiselle Marthe told us the truth
on another point and incidentally gave Jack Renauld the lie. Did you
notice his hesitation when I asked him if he saw Marthe Daubreuil on
the night of the crime? He paused and then said Yes. I suspected
that he was lying. It was necessary for me to see Mademoiselle
Marthe before he could put her on her guard. Three little words
gave me the information I wanted. When I asked her if she knew that
Jack Renauld was here that night, she answered He told me. Now,
Hastings, what was Jack Renauld doing here on that eventful evening,
and if he did not see Mademoiselle Marthe whom did he see?
Surely, Poirot, I cried, aghast, you cannot believe that a boy
like that would murder his own father.
Mon ami , said Poirot, you continue to be of a sentimentality
unbelievable! I have seen mothers who murdered their little children
for the sake of the insurance money! After that, one can believe
anything.
And the motive?
Money of course. Remember that Jack Renauld thought that he would
come in to half his father s fortune at the latter s death.
But the tramp. Where does he come in?
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
Giraud would say that he was an accomplice an apache who helped
young Renauld to commit the crime, and who was conveniently put
out of the way afterwards.
But the hair round the dagger? The woman s hair?
Ah, said Poirot, smiling broadly. That is the cream of
Giraud s little jest. According to him, it is not a woman s hair
at all. Remember that the youths of today wear their hair brushed
straight back from the forehead with pomade or hairwash to make it
lie flat. Consequently some of the hairs are of considerable length.
And you believe that too?
No, said Poirot with a curious smile. For I know it to be the
hair of a woman and more, which woman!
Madame Daubreuil, I announced positively.
Perhaps, said Poirot, regarding me quizzically.
But I refused to allow myself to get annoyed.
What are we going to do now? I asked, as we entered the hall of
the Villa Genevi ve.
I wish to make a search amongst the effects of M. Jack
Renauld. That is why I had to get him out of the way for a few
hours.
But will not Giraud have searched already? I asked doubtfully.
Of course. He builds a case, as a beaver builds a dam, with a
fatiguing industry. But he will not have looked for the things
that I am seeking in all probability he would not have seen their
importance if they stared him in the face. Let us begin.
Neatly and methodically, Poirot opened each drawer in turn, examined
the contents, and returned them exactly to their places. It was
a singularly dull and uninteresting proceeding. Poirot waded on
through collars, pajamas and socks. A purring noise outside drew
me to the window. Instantly I became galvanized into life.
Poirot! I cried. A car has just driven up. Giraud is in it,
and Jack Renauld, and two gendarmes.
Sacr tonnerre! growled Poirot. That animal of a Giraud,
could he not wait? I shall not be able to replace the things in
this last drawer with the proper method. Let us be quick.
Unceremoniously he tumbled out the things on the floor, mostly
ties and handkerchiefs. Suddenly with a cry of triumph Poirot
pounced on something, a small square cardboard, evidently a
photograph. Thrusting it into his pocket, he returned the things
pell mell to the drawer, and seizing me by the arm dragged me
out of the room and down the stairs. In the hall stood Giraud,
contemplating his prisoner.
Good afternoon, M. Giraud, said Poirot. What have we here?
Giraud nodded his head towards Jack.
He was trying to make a getaway, but I was too sharp for him. He
is under arrest for the murder of his father, M. Paul Renauld.
Poirot wheeled to confront the boy who leaned limply against the
door, his face ashy pale.
What do you say to that, jeune homme ?
Jack Renauld stared at him stonily.
Nothing, he said.
19
I Use My Grey Cells
I was dumbfounded. Up to the last, I had not been able bring myself
to believe Jack Renauld guilty. I had expected a ringing proclamation
of his innocence when Poirot challenged him. But now, watching
him as he stood, white and limp against the wall, and hearing the
damning admission fall from his lips, I doubted no longer.
But Poirot had turned to Giraud.
What are your grounds for arresting him?
Do you expect me to give them to you?
As a matter of courtesy, yes.
Giraud looked at him doubtfully. He was torn between a desire to
refuse rudely and the pleasure of triumphing over his adversary.
You think I have made a mistake, I suppose? he sneered.
It would not surprise me, replied Poirot, with a soup on of
malice.
Giraud s face took on a deeper tinge of red.
Eh bien , come in here. You shall judge for yourself. He flung
open the door of the salon , and we passed in, leaving Jack Renauld
in the care of the two other men.
Now, M. Poirot, said Giraud laying his hat on the table, and
speaking with the utmost sarcasm, I will treat you to a little
lecture on detective work. I will show you how we moderns work.
Bien! said Poirot, composing himself to listen. I will show
you how admirably the Old Guard can listen, and he leaned back and
closed his eyes, opening them for a moment to remark. Do not fear
that I shall sleep. I will attend most carefully.
Of course, began Giraud, I soon saw through all that Chilian
tomfoolery. Two men were in it but they were not mysterious
foreigners! All that was a blind.
Very creditable so far, my dear Giraud, murmured
Poirot. Especially after that clever trick of theirs with the
match and cigarette end.
Giraud glared, but continued:
A man must have been connected with the case, in order to dig
the grave. There is no man who actually benefits by the crime,
but there was a man who thought he would benefit. I heard of
Jack Renauld s quarrel with his father, and of the threats that
he had used. The motive was established. Now as to means. Jack
Renauld was in Merlinville that night. He concealed the fact
which turned suspicion into certainty. Then we found a second
victim stabbed with the same dagger . We know when that dagger
was stolen. Captain Hastings here can fix the time. Jack Renauld,
arriving from Cherbourg, was the only person who could have taken
it. I have accounted for all the other members of the household.
Poirot interrupted:
You are wrong. There is one other person who could have taken
the dagger.
You refer to M. Stonor? He arrived at the front door, in an
automobile which had brought him straight from Calais. Ah, believe
me, I have looked into everything. M. Jack Renauld arrived by
train. An hour elapsed between his arrival, and the moment he
presented himself at the house. Without doubt, he saw Captain
Hastings and his companion leave the shed, slipped in himself and
took the dagger, stabbed his accomplice in the shed
Who was already dead!
Giraud shrugged his shoulders.
Possibly he did not observe that. He may have judged him to be
sleeping. Without doubt they had a rendezvous. In any case he
knew this apparent second murder would greatly complicate the
case. It did.
But it could not deceive M. Giraud, murmured Poirot.
You mock yourself at me. But I will give you one last irrefutable
proof. Madame Renauld s story was false a fabrication from beginning
to end. We believe Madame Renauld to have loved her husband yet
she lied to shield his murderer . For whom will a woman lie?
Sometimes for herself, usually for the man she loves, always
for her children. That is the last the irrefutable proof. You can
not get round it.
Giraud paused, flushed and triumphant. Poirot regarded him steadily.
That is my case, said Giraud. What have you to say to it?
Only that there is one thing you have failed to take into account.
What is that?
Jack Renauld was presumably acquainted with the planning out of
the golf course. He knew that the body would be discovered almost
at once, when they started to dig the bunker.
Giraud laughed out loud.
But it is idiotic what you say there! He wanted the body to be
found! Until it was found, he could not presume death, and would
have been unable to enter into his inheritance.
I saw a quick flash of green in Poirot s eyes as he rose to his feet.
Then why bury it? he asked softly. Reflect, Giraud. Since it was
to Jack Renauld s advantage that the body should be found without
delay, why dig a grave at all?
Giraud did not reply. The question found him unprepared. He shrugged
his shoulders as though to intimate that it was of no importance.
Poirot moved towards the door. I followed him.
There is one more thing that you have failed to take into account,
he said over his shoulder.
What is that?
The piece of lead piping, said Poirot, and left the room.
Jack Renauld still stood in the hall, with a white dumb face, but as
we came out of the salon , he looked up sharply. At the same moment
there was the sound of a footfall on the staircase. Mrs. Renauld
was descending it. At the sight of her son, standing between the
two myrmidons of the law, she stopped as though petrified.
Jack, she faltered. Jack, what is this?
He looked up at her, his face set.
They have arrested me, mother.
What?
She uttered a piercing cry, and before any one could get to her
swayed and fell heavily. We both ran to her and lifted her up. In
a minute Poirot stood up again.
She has cut her head badly, on the corner of the stairs. I fancy
there is a slight concussion also. If Giraud wants a statement from
her, he will have to wait. She will probably be unconscious for at
least a week.
Denise and Fran oise had run to their mistress, and leaving her
in their charge Poirot left the house. He walked with his head bent
down, frowning thoughtfully at the ground. For some time I did not
speak, but at last I ventured to put a question to him.
Do you believe then, in spite of all appearances to the contrary,
that Jack Renauld may not be guilty?
Poirot did not answer at once, but after a long wait he said gravely:
I do not know, Hastings. There is just a chance of it. Of course
Giraud is all wrong wrong from beginning to end. If Jack Renauld
is guilty, it is in spite of Giraud s arguments, not because
of them. And the gravest indictment against him is known only to me.
What is that? I asked, impressed.
If you would use your grey cells, and see the whole case clearly
as I do, you too would perceive it, my friend.
This was what I called one of Poirot s irritating answers. He went
on, without waiting for me to speak.
Let us walk this way to the sea. We will sit on that little mound
there, overlooking the beach, and review the case. You shall know
all that I know, but I would prefer that you should come at the
truth by your own efforts not by my leading you by the hand.
We established ourselves on the grassy knoll as Poirot had suggested,
looking out to sea. From farther along the sand, the cries of the
bathers reached us faintly. The sea was of the palest blue, and the
halcyon calm reminded me of the day we had arrived at Merlinville,
my own good spirits, and Poirot s suggestion that I was fey. What
a long time seemed to have elapsed since then. And in reality it
was only three days!
Think, my friend, said Poirot s voice encouragingly. Arrange your
ideas. Be methodical. Be orderly. There is the secret of success.
I endeavoured to obey him, casting my mind back over all the
details of the case. And reluctantly it seemed to me that the
only clear and possible solution was that of Giraud which Poirot
despised. I reflected anew. If there was daylight anywhere it was
in the direction of Madame Daubreuil. Giraud was ignorant of her
connection with the Beroldy Case. Poirot had declared the Beroldy
Case to be all important. It was there I must seek. I was on the
right track now. And suddenly I started as an idea of bewildering
luminosity shot into my brain. Trembling I built up my hypothesis.
You have a little idea, I see, mon ami ! Capital. We progress.
I sat up, and lit a pipe.
Poirot, I said, it seems to me we have been strangely remiss. I
say we although I dare say I would be nearer the mark. But you
must pay the penalty of your determined secrecy. So I say again we
have been strangely remiss. There is some one we have forgotten.
And who is that? inquired Poirot, with twinkling eyes.
Georges Conneau!
20
An Amazing Statement
The next moment Poirot embraced me warmly. Enfin! You have
arrived. And all by yourself. It is superb! Continue your
reasoning. You are right. Decidedly we have done wrong to forget
Georges Conneau.
I was so flattered by the little man s approval that I could hardly
continue. But at last I collected my thoughts and went on.
Georges Conneau disappeared twenty years ago, but we have no reason
to believe that he is dead.
Aucunement , agreed Poirot. Proceed.
Therefore we will assume that he is alive.
Exactly.
Or that he was alive until recently.
De mieux en mieux!
We will presume, I continued, my enthusiasm rising, that he
has fallen on evil days. He has become a criminal, an apache, a
tramp a what you will. He chances to come to Merlinville. There
he finds the woman he has never ceased to love.
Eh eh! The sentimentality, warned Poirot.
Where one hates one also loves, I quoted or misquoted. At any
rate he finds her there, living under an assumed name. But she has
a new lover, the Englishman, Renauld. Georges Conneau, the memory
of old wrongs rising in him, quarrels with this Renauld. He lies in
wait for him as he comes to visit his mistress, and stabs him in
the back. Then, terrified at what he has done, he starts to dig a
grave. I imagine it likely that Madame Daubreuil comes out to look
for her lover. She and Conneau have a terrible scene. He drags her
into the shed, and there suddenly falls down in an epileptic fit.
Now supposing Jack Renauld to appear. Madame Daubreuil tells him all,
points out to him the dreadful consequences to her daughter if this
scandal of the past is revived. His father s murderer is dead let
them do their best to hush it up. Jack Renauld consents goes to
the house and has an interview with his mother, winning her over to
his point of view. Primed with the story that Madame Daubreuil has
suggested to him, she permits herself to be gagged and bound. There,
Poirot, what do you think of that? I leaned back, flushed with
the pride of successful reconstruction.
Poirot looked at me thoughtfully.
I think that you should write for the Kinema, mon ami , he
remarked at last.
You mean ?
It would make a good film, the story that you have recounted to
me there but it bears no sort of resemblance to everyday life.
I admit that I haven t gone into all the details, but
You have gone further you have ignored them magnificently. What
about the way the two men were dressed? Do you suggest that after
stabbing his victim, Conneau removed his suit of clothes, donned
it himself, and replaced the dagger?
I don t see that that matters, I objected rather huffily. He may
have obtained clothes and money from Madame Daubreuil by threats
earlier in the day.
By threats eh? You seriously advance that supposition?
Certainly. He could have threatened to reveal her identity to the
Renaulds, which would probably have put an end to all hopes of her
daughter s marriage.
You are wrong, Hastings. He could not blackmail her, for she had the
whip hand. Georges Conneau, remember, is still wanted for murder. A
word from her and he is in danger of the guillotine.
I was forced, rather reluctantly, to admit the truth of this.
Your theory, I remarked acidly, is doubtless correct as to
all the details?
My theory is the truth, said Poirot quietly. And the truth is
necessarily correct. In your theory you made a fundamental error. You
permitted your imagination to lead you astray with midnight
assignations and passionate love scenes. But in investigating crime
we must take our stand upon the commonplace. Shall I demonstrate
my methods to you?
Oh, by all means let us have a demonstration!
Poirot sat very upright and began, wagging his forefinger
emphatically to emphasize his points.
I will start as you started from the basic fact of Georges
Conneau. Now the story told by Madame Beroldy in court as to the
Russians was admittedly a fabrication. If she was innocent
of connivance in the crime, it was concocted by her, and by her
only as she stated. If, on the other hand, she was not innocent,
it might have been invented by either her or Georges Conneau.
Now is this case we are investigating, we meet the same tale. As
I pointed out to you, the facts render it very unlikely that Madame
Daubreuil inspired it. So we turn to the hypothesis that the story
had its origin in the brain of Georges Conneau. Very good. Georges
Conneau, therefore, planned the crime with Madame Renauld as his
accomplice. She is in the limelight, and behind her is a shadowy
figure whose alias is unknown to us.
Now let us go carefully over the Renauld Case from the beginning,
setting down each significant point in its chronological order. You
have a notebook and pencil? Good. Now what is the earliest point
to note down?
The letter to you?
That was the first we knew of it, but it is not the proper beginning
of the case. The first point of any significance, I should say,
is the change that came over M. Renauld shortly after arriving in
Merlinville, and which is attested to by several witnesses. We
have also to consider his friendship with Madame Daubreuil, and
the large sums of money paid over to her. From thence we can come
directly to the 23rd May.
Poirot paused, cleared his throat, and signed to me to write.
23rd May. M. Renauld quarrels with his son over latter s wish
to marry Marthe Daubreuil. Son leaves for Paris.
24th May. M. Renauld alters his will, leaving entire control of
his fortune in his wife s hands.
7th June. Quarrel with tramp in garden, witnessed by Marthe
Daubreuil.
Letter written to M. Hercule Poirot, imploring assistance.
Telegram sent to Jack Renauld, bidding him proceed by the Anzora
to Buenos Ayres.
Chauffeur, Masters, sent off on a holiday.
Visit of a lady, that evening. As he is seeing her out, his words
are Yes, yes but for God s sake go now. . . .
Poirot paused.
There, Hastings, take each of those facts one by one, consider
them carefully by themselves and in relation to the whole, and see
if you do not get new light on the matter.
I endeavoured conscientiously to do as he had said. After a moment
or two, I said rather doubtfully:
As to the first points, the question seems to be whether we adopt
the theory of blackmail, or of an infatuation for this woman.
Blackmail, decidedly. You heard what Stonor said as to his character
and habits.
Mrs. Renauld did not confirm his view, I argued.
We have already seen that Madame Renauld s testimony cannot be
relied upon in any way. We must trust to Stonor on that point.
Still, if Renauld had an affair with a woman called Bella, there
seems no inherent improbability in his having another with Madame
Daubreuil.
None whatever, I grant you, Hastings. But did he?
The letter, Poirot. You forget the letter.
No, I do not forget. But what makes you think that letter was
written to M. Renauld?
Why it was found in his pocket and and
And that is all! cut in Poirot. There was no mention of any
name to show to whom the letter was addressed. We assumed it was
to the dead man because it was in the pocket of his overcoat. Now,
mon ami , something about that overcoat struck me as unusual. I
measured it, and made the remark that he wore his overcoat very
long. That remark should have given you to think.
I thought you were just saying it for the sake of saying something,
I confessed.
Ah, quelle id e ! Later you observed me measuring the overcoat
of M. Jack Renauld. Eh bien , M. Jack Renauld wears his overcoat
very short. Put those two facts together with a third, namely that
M. Jack Renauld flung out of the house in a hurry on his departure
for Paris, and tell me what you make of it!
I see, I said slowly, as the meaning of Poirot s remarks bore
in upon me. That letter was written to Jack Renauld not to his
father. He caught up the wrong overcoat in his haste and agitation.
Poirot nodded.
Pr cisement! We can return to this point later. For the moment
let us content ourselves with accepting the letter as having nothing
to do with M. Renauld p re , and pass to the next chronological
event.
May 23rd, I read, M. Renauld quarrels with his son over latter s
wish to marry Marthe Daubreuil. Son leaves for Paris. I don t see
anything much to remark upon there, and the altering of the will
the following day seems straightforward enough. It was the direct
result of the quarrel.
We agree, mon ami at least as to the cause. But what exact
motive underlay this procedure of M. Renauld s?
I opened my eyes in surprise.
Anger against his son of course.
Yet he wrote him affectionate letters to Paris?
So Jack Renauld says, but he cannot produce them.
Well, let us pass from that.
Now we come to the day of the tragedy. You have placed the events
of the morning in a certain order. Have you any justification
for that?
I have ascertained that the letter to me was posted at the same
time as the telegram was despatched. Masters was informed he could
take a holiday shortly afterwards. In my opinion the quarrel with
the tramp took place anterior to these happenings.
I do not see that you can fix that definitely unless you question
Mademoiselle Dabreuil again.
There is no need. I am sure of it. And if you do not see that,
you see nothing, Hastings!
I looked at him for a moment.
Of course! I am an idiot. If the tramp was Georges Conneau, it was
after the stormy interview with him that Mr. Renauld apprehended
danger. He sent away the chauffeur, Masters, whom he suspected of
being in the other s pay, he wired to his son, and sent for you.
A faint smile crossed Poirot s lips.
You do not think it strange that he should use exactly the same
expressions in his letter as Madame Renauld used later in her
story? If the mention of Santiago was a blind, why should Renauld
speak of it, and what is more send his son there?
It is puzzling, I admit, but perhaps we shall find some explanation
later. We come now to the evening, and the visit of the mysterious
lady. I confess that that fairly baffles me, unless it was Madame
Daubreuil, as Fran oise all along maintained.
Poirot shook his head.
My friend, my friend, where are your wits wandering? Remember
the fragment of cheque, and the fact that the name Bella Duveen
was faintly familiar to Stonor, and I think we may take it for
granted that Bella Duveen is the full name of Jack s unknown
correspondent, and that it was she who came to the Villa Genevi ve
that night. Whether she intended to see Jack, or whether she meant
all along to appeal to his father we cannot be certain, but I
think we may assume that this is what occurred. She produced her
claim upon Jack, probably showed letters that he had written her,
and the older man tried to buy her off by writing a cheque. This
she indignantly tore up. The terms of her letter are those of
a woman genuinely in love, and she would probably deeply resent
being offered money. In the end he got rid of her, and here the
words that he used are significant.
Yes, yes, but for God s sake go now, I repeated. They seem
to me a little vehement, perhaps, that is all.
That is enough. He was desperately anxious for the girl to
go. Why? Not only because the interview was unpleasant. No,
it was the time that was slipping by, and for some reason time
was precious.
Why should it be? I asked, bewildered.
That is what we ask ourselves. Why should it be? But later we have
the incident of the wrist watch which again shows us that time plays
a very important part in the crime. We are now fast approaching
the actual drama. It is half past ten when Bella Duveen leaves,
and by the evidence of the wrist watch we know that the crime
was committed, or at any rate that it was staged, before twelve
o clock. We have reviewed all the events anterior to the murder,
there remains only one unplaced. By the doctor s evidence, the
tramp, when found, had been dead at least forty eight hours with
a possible margin of twenty four hours more. Now, with no other
facts to help me than those we have discussed, I place the death
as having occurred on the morning of June 7th.
I stared at him, stupefied.
But how? Why? How can you possibly know?
Because only in that way can the sequence of events be logically
explained. Mon ami , I have taken you step by step along the
way. Do you not now see what is so glaringly plain?
My dear Poirot, I can t see anything glaring about it. I did think
I was beginning to see my way before, but I m now hopelessly fogged.
Poirot looked at me sadly, and shook his head. Mon Dieu! But
it is triste ! A good intelligence and so deplorably lacking in
method. There is an exercise most excellent for the development of
the little grey cells. I will impart it to you
For Heaven s sake, not now! You really are the most irritating of
fellows, Poirot. For goodness sake, get on and tell me who killed
M. Renauld.
That is just what I am not sure of as yet.
But you said it was glaringly clear?
We talk at cross purposes, my friend. Remember, it is two crimes we
are investigating for which, as I pointed out to you, we have the
necessary two bodies. There, there, ne vous impatientez pas ! I
explain all. To begin with, we apply our psychology. We find three
points at which M. Renauld displays a distinct change of view and
action three psychological points therefore. The occurs immediately
after arriving in Merlinville, the second after quarrelling with
his son on a certain subject, the third on the morning of June
7th. Now for the three causes. We can attribute No. 1 to meeting
Madame Daubreuil. No. 2 is indirectly connected with her since it
concerns a marriage between M. Renauld s son and her daughter. But
the cause of No. 3 is hidden from us. We have to deduce it. Now,
mon ami , let me ask you a question; who do we believe to have
planned this crime?
Georges Conneau, I said doubtfully, eyeing Poirot warily.
Exactly. Now Giraud laid it down as an axiom that a woman lies
to save herself, the man she loves, and her child. Since we are
satisfied that was Georges Conneau who dictated the lie to her,
and as Georges Conneau is not Jack Renauld, follows that the
third case is put out of court. And, still attributing the crime
to Georges Conneau, the first is equally so. So we are forced to
the second that Madame Renauld lied for the sake of the man she
loved or in other words, for the sake of Georges Conneau. You
agree to that.
Yes, I admitted. It seems logical enough.
Bien! Madame Renauld loves Georges Conneau. Who, then, is
Georges Conneau?
The tramp.
Have we any evidence to show that Madame Renauld loved the tramp?
No, but
Very well then. Do not cling to theories where facts no longer
support them. Ask yourself instead who Madame Renauld did love.
I shook my head perplexed.
Mais, oui , you know perfectly. Who did Madame Renauld love so
dearly that when she saw his dead body, she fell down in a swoon?
I stared dumbfounded.
Her husband? I gasped.
Poirot nodded.
Her husband or Georges Conneau, whichever you like to call him.
I rallied myself.
But it s impossible.
How impossible? Did we not agree just now that Madame Daubreuil
was in a position to blackmail Georges Conneau?
Yes, but
And did she not very effectively blackmail M. Renauld?
That may be true enough, but
And is it not a fact that we know nothing of M. Renauld s youth
and upbringing? That he springs suddenly into existence as a French
Canadian exactly twenty two years ago?
All that is so, I said more firmly, but you seem to me to be
overlooking one salient point.
What is it, my friend?
Why, we have admitted Georges Conneau planned the crime. That brings
us to the ridiculous statement that he planned his own murder!
Eh bien, mon ami , said Poirot placidly, that is just what he
did do!
21
Hercule Poirot on the Case!
In a measured voice, Poirot began his exposition.
It seems strange to you, mon ami , that a man should plan his
own death? So strange, that you prefer to reject the truth as
fantastic, and to revert to a story that is in reality ten times
more impossible. Yes, M. Renauld planned his own death, but there
is one detail that perhaps escapes you he did not intend to die.
I shook my head, bewildered.
But no, it is all most simple really, said Poirot kindly. For
the crime that M. Renauld proposed a murderer was not necessary,
as I told you, but a body was. Let us reconstruct, seeing events
this time from a different angle.
Georges Conneau flies from justice to Canada. There, under
an assumed name he marries, and finally acquires a vast fortune
in South America. But there is a nostalgia upon him for his own
country. Twenty years have elapsed, he is considerably changed
in appearance, besides being a man of such eminence that no one
is likely to connect him with a fugitive from justice many years
ago. He deems it quite safe to return. He takes up his headquarters
in England, but intends to spend the summers in France. And ill
fortune, that obscure justice which shapes men s ends, and will
not allow them to evade the consequences of their acts, takes him
to Merlinville. There, in the whole of France, is the one person
who is capable of recognizing him. It is, of course, a gold mine
to Madame Daubreuil, and a gold mine of which she is not slow to
take advantage. He is helpless, absolutely in her power. And she
bleeds him heavily.
And then the inevitable happens. Jack Renauld falls in love with the
beautiful girl he sees almost daily, and wishes to marry her. That
rouses his father. At all costs, he will prevent his son marrying
the daughter of this evil woman. Jack Renauld knows nothing of
his father s past, but Madame Renauld knows everything. She is a
woman of great force of character, and passionately devoted to her
husband. They take counsel together. Renauld sees only one way
of escape death. He must appear to die, in reality escaping to
another country where he will start again under an assumed name,
and where Madame Renauld, having played the widow s part for a
while, can join him. It is essential that she should have control
of the money, so he alters his will. How they meant to manage the
body business originally, I do not know possibly an art student s
skeleton and a fire or something of the kind, but long before
their plans have matured an event occurs which plays into their
hands. A rough tramp, violent and abusive, finds his way into
the garden. There is a struggle, M. Renauld seeks to eject him,
and suddenly the tramp, an epileptic, falls down in a fit. He is
dead. M. Renauld calls his wife. Together they drag him into the
shed as we know, the event had occurred just outside and they
realize the marvellous opportunity that has been vouchsafed them. The
man bears no resemblance to M. Renauld, but he is middle aged,
of a usual French type. That is sufficient.
I rather fancy that they sat on the bench up there, out of earshot
from the house, discussing matters. Their plan was quickly made. The
identification must rest solely on Madame Renauld s evidence. Jack
Renauld and the chauffeur who had been with his master two years
must be got out of the way. It was unlikely that the French women
servants would go near the body, and in any case Renauld intended
to take measures to deceive any one not likely to appreciate
details. Masters was sent off, a telegram despatched to Jack,
Buenos Ayres being selected to give credence to the story that
Renauld had decided upon. Having heard of me, as a rather obscure
elderly detective, he wrote his appeal for help knowing that, when
I arrived, the production of the letter would have a profound effect
upon the examining magistrate which, of course, it did.
They dressed the body of the tramp in a suit of M. Renauld s and
left his ragged coat and trousers by the door of the shed, not
daring to take them into the house. And then, to give credence
to the tale Madame Renauld was to tell, they drove the aeroplane
dagger through his heart. That night, M. Renauld will first bind
and gag his wife, and then, taking a spade, will dig a grave in
that particular spot of ground where he knows a how do you call
it? bunkair? is to be made. It is essential that the body should
be found Madame Daubreuil must have no suspicions. On the other
hand, if a little time elapses, any dangers as to identity will
be greatly lessened. Then, M. Renauld will don the tramp s rags,
and shuffle off to the station, where he will leave, unnoticed,
by the 12:10 train. Since the crime will be supposed to have taken
place two hours later, no suspicion can possibly attach to him.
You see now his annoyance at the inopportune visit of the girl
Bella. Every moment of delay is fatal to his plans. He gets rid of
her as soon as he can, however. Then, to work! He leaves the front
door slightly ajar to create the impression that the assassins
left that way. He binds and gags Madame Renauld, correcting his
mistake of twenty two years ago, when the looseness of the bonds
caused suspicion to fall upon his accomplice, but leaving her
primed with essentially the same story as he had invented before,
proving the unconscious recoil of the mind against originality. The
night is chilly, and he slips on an overcoat over his underclothing,
intending to cast it into the grave with the dead man. He goes out
by the window, smoothing over the flower bed carefully, and thereby
furnishing the most positive evidence against himself. He goes out
on to the lonely golf links, and he digs and then
Yes?
And then, said Poirot gravely, the justice that he has so
long eluded overtakes him. An unknown hand stabs him in the
back. . . . Now, Hastings, you understand what I mean when I talk
of two crimes. The first crime, the crime that M. Renauld, in
his arrogance, asked us to investigate ah, but he made a famous
mistake there! He misjudged Hercule Poirot! is solved. But behind
it lies a deeper riddle. And to solve that will be difficult since
the criminal in his wisdom, has been content to avail himself of
the devices prepared by M. Renauld. It has been a particularly
perplexing and baffling mystery to solve. A young hand, like Giraud,
who does not place any reliance on the psychology, is almost certain
to fail.
You re marvellous, Poirot, I said, with admiration. Absolutely
marvellous. No one on earth but you could have done it!
I think my praise pleased him. For once in his life, he looked
almost embarrassed.
Ah, then you no longer despise poor old Papa Poirot? You shift
your allegiance back from the human foxhound?
His term for Giraud never failed to make me smile.
Rather. You ve scored over him handsomely.
That poor Giraud, said Poirot, trying unsuccessfully to look
modest. Without doubt it is not all stupidity. He has had la
mauvaise chance once or twice. That dark hair coiled round the
dagger, for instance. To say the least, it was misleading.
To tell you the truth, Poirot, I said slowly, even now I don t
quite see whose hair was it?
Madame Renauld s of course. That is where la mauvaise chance came
in. Her hair, dark originally, is almost completely silvered. It
might just as easily have been a grey hair and then, by no
conceivable effort could Giraud have persuaded himself it came from
the head of Jack Renauld! But it is all of a piece. Always the facts
must be twisted to fit the theory! Did not Giraud find the traces
of two persons, a man and a woman, in the shed? And how does that
fit in with his reconstruction of the case? I will tell you it does
not fit in, and so we shall hear no more of them! I ask you, is that
a methodical way of working? The great Giraud! The great Giraud is
nothing but a toy balloon swollen with its own importance. But I,
Hercule Poirot, whom he despises, will be the little pin that pricks
the big balloon comme a! And he made an expressive gesture.
Then, calming down, he resumed:
Without doubt, when Madame Renauld recovers, she will speak. The
possibility of her son being accused of the murder never occurred
to her. How should it, when she believed him safely at sea on board
the Anzora ? Ah! voil une femme , Hastings! What force, what
self command! She only made one slip. On his unexpected return:
It does not matter now . And no one noticed no one realized
the significance of those words. What a terrible part she has had
to play, poor woman. Imagine the shock when she goes to identify
the body and, instead of what she expects, sees the actual lifeless
form of the husband she has believed miles away by now. No wonder
she fainted! But since then, despite her grief and her despair,
how resolutely she has played her part, and how the anguish of
it must wring her. She cannot say a word to set us on the track
of the real murderers. For her son s sake, no one must know that
Paul Renauld was Georges Conneau, the criminal. Final and most
bitter blow, she has admitted publicly that Madame Daubreuil was
her husband s mistress for a hint of blackmail might be fatal to
her secret. How cleverly she dealt with the examining magistrate
when he asked her if there was any mystery in her husband s past
life. Nothing so romantic, I am sure, M. le juge. It was perfect,
the indulgent tone, the soup on of sad mockery. At once M. Hautet
felt himself foolish and melodramatic. Yes, she is a great woman! If
she loved a criminal, she loved him royally!
Poirot lost himself in contemplation.
One thing more, Poirot, what about the piece of lead piping?
You do not see? To disfigure the victim s face so that it would
be unrecognizable. It was that which first set me on the right
track. And that imbecile of a Giraud, swarming all over it to look
for match ends! Did I not tell you that a clue of two feet long
was quite as good as a clue of two inches?
Well, Giraud will sing small now, I observed hastily, to lead
the conversation away from my own shortcomings.
As I said before, will he? If he has arrived at the right person
by the wrong method, he will not permit that to worry him.
But surely I paused as I saw the new trend of things.
You see, Hastings, we must now start again. Who killed
M. Renauld? Some one who was near the Villa just before twelve
o clock that night, some one who would benefit by his death the
description fits Jack Renauld only too well. The crime need not
have been premeditated. And then the dagger!
I started, I had not realized that point.
Of course, I said. The second dagger we found in the tramp was
Mrs. Renauld s. There were two, then.
Certainly, and, since they were duplicates, it stands to reason
that Jack Renauld was the owner. But that would not trouble me
so much. In fact I have a little idea as to that. No, the worst
indictment against him is again psychological heredity, mon ami ,
heredity! Like father, like son Jack Renauld, when all is said or
done, is the son of Georges Conneau.
His tone was grave and earnest, and I was impressed in spite
of myself.
What is your little idea that you mentioned just now? I asked.
For answer, Poirot consulted his turnip faced watch, and then asked:
What time is the afternoon boat from Calais?
About five, I believe.
That will do very well. We shall just have time.
You are going to England?
Yes, my friend.
Why?
To find a possible witness.
Who?
With a rather peculiar smile upon his face, Poirot replied:
Miss Bella Duveen.
But how will you find her what do you know about her?
I know nothing about her but I can guess a good deal. We may take
it for granted that her name is Bella Duveen, and since that
name was faintly familiar to M. Stonor, though evidently not in
connection with the Renauld family, it is probable that she is on
the stage. Jack Renauld was a young man with plenty of money, and
twenty years of age. The stage is sure to have been the home of his
first love. It tallies, too, with M. Renauld s attempt to placate
her with a cheque. I think I shall find her all right especially
with the help of this .
And he brought out the photograph I had seen him take from Jack
Renauld s drawer. With love from Bella, was scrawled across the
corner, but it was not that which held my eyes fascinated. The
likeness was not first rate but for all that it was unmistakable
to me. I felt a cold sinking, as though some unutterable calamity
had befallen me.
It was the face of Cinderella.
22
I Find Love
For a moment or two I sat as though frozen, the photograph still in
my hand. Then, summoning all my courage to appear unmoved, I handed
it back. At the same time, I stole a quick glance at Poirot. Had he
noticed anything? But to my relief he did not seem to be observing
me. Anything unusual in my manner had certainly escaped him.
He rose briskly to his feet.
We have no time to lose. We must make our departure with all
despatch. All is well the sea it will be calm!
In the bustle of departure, I had no time for thinking, but once
on board the boat, secure from Poirot s observation he, as usual,
was practising the method most excellent of Laverguier I pulled
myself together, and attacked the facts dispassionately. How much
did Poirot know? Was he aware that my acquaintance of the train and
Bella Duveen were one and the same? Why had he gone to the H tel
du Phare? On my behalf as I had believed? Or had I only fatuously
thought so, and was this visit undertaken with a deeper and more
sinister purpose?
But in any case, why was he bent on finding this girl? Did he
suspect her of having seen Jack Renauld commit the crime? Or did he
suspect but that was impossible! The girl had no grudge against the
elder Renauld, no possible motive for wishing his death. What had
brought her back to the scene of the murder? I went over the facts
carefully. She must have left the train at Calais where I parted from
her that day. No wonder I had been unable to find her on the boat. If
she had dined in Calais, and then taken a train out to Merlinville,
she would have arrived at the Villa Genevi ve just about the time
that Fran oise said. What had she done when she left the house
just after ten? Presumably either gone to an hotel, or returned to
Calais. And then? The crime had been committed on Tuesday night. On
Thursday morning, she was once more in Merlinville. Had she ever left
France at all? I doubted it very much. What kept her there the hope
of seeing Jack Renauld? I had told her as at the time we believed
that he was on the high seas en route to Buenos Ayres. Possibly she
was aware that the Anzora had not sailed. But to know that she must
have seen Jack. Was that what Poirot was after? Had Jack Renauld,
returning to see Marthe Daubreuil, come face to face instead with
Bella Duveen, the girl he had heartlessly thrown over?
I began to see daylight. If that were indeed the case, it might
furnish Jack with the alibi he needed. Yet under those circumstances
his silence seemed difficult to explain. Why could he not have
spoken out boldly? Did he fear for this former entanglement of his to
come to the ears of Marthe Daubreuil? I shook my head, dissatisfied.
The thing had been harmless enough, a foolish boy and girl affair,
and I reflected cynically that the son of a millionaire was not
likely to be thrown over by a penniless French girl, who moreover
loved him devotedly, without a much graver cause.
Altogether I found the affair puzzling and unsatisfactory.
I disliked intensely being associated with Poirot in hunting this
girl down, but I could not see any way of avoiding it, without
revealing everything to him, and this, for some reason, I was loath
to do.
Poirot reappeared brisk and smiling at Dover, and our journey to
London was uneventful. It was past nine o clock when we arrived,
and I supposed that we should return straight away to our rooms
and do nothing till the morning. But Poirot had other plans.
We must lose no time, mon ami . The news of the arrest will not
be in the English papers until the day after tomorrow, but still
we must lose no time.
I did not quite follow his reasoning, but I merely asked how he
proposed to find the girl.
You remember Joseph Aarons, the theatrical agent? No? I assisted
him in a little matter of a Japanese wrestler. A pretty little
problem, I must recount it to you one day. He, without doubt, will
be able to put us in the way of finding out what we want to know.
It took us some time to run Mr. Aarons to earth, and it was after
midnight when we finally managed it. He greeted Poirot with every
evidence of warmth, and professed himself ready to be of service
to us in any way.
There s not much about the profession I don t know, he said,
beaming genially.
Eh bien , M. Aarons, I desire to find a young girl called Bella
Duveen.
Bella Duveen. I know the name, but for the moment I can t place
it. What s her line?
That I do not know but here is her photograph.
Mr. Aarons studied it for a moment, then his face lighted.
Got it! He slapped his thigh. The Dulcibella Kids, by the Lord!
The Dulcibella Kids?
That s it. They re sisters. Acrobats, dancers and singers. Give
quite a good little turn. They re in the provinces somewhere,
I believe if they re not resting. They ve been on in Paris for
the last two or three weeks.
Can you find out for me exactly where they are?
Easy as a bird. You go home, and I ll send you round the dope in
the morning.
With this promise we took leave of him. He was as good as his
word. About eleven o clock the following day, a scribbled note
reached us.
The Dulcibella Sisters are on at the Palace in Coventry. Good luck
to you.
Without more ado, we started for Coventry. Poirot made no inquiries
at the theatre, but contented himself with booking stalls for the
variety performance that evening.
The show was wearisome beyond words or perhaps it was only my
mood that made it seem so. Japanese families balanced themselves
precariously, would be fashionable men, in greenish evening dress
and exquisitely slicked hair, reeled off society patter and danced
marvellously, stout prima donnas sang at the top of the human
register, a comic comedian endeavoured to be Mr. George Robey and
failed signally.
At last the number went up which announced the Dulcibella Kids. My
heart beat sickeningly. There she was there they both were, the pair
of them, one flaxen haired, one dark, matching as to size, with short
fluffy skirts and immense buster brown bows. They looked a pair of
extremely piquant children. They began to sing. Their voices were
fresh and true, rather thin and music hally, but attractive.
It was quite a pretty little turn. They danced neatly, and did
some clever little acrobatic feats. The words of their songs were
crisp and catchy. When the curtain fell, there was a full meed of
applause. Evidently the Dulcibella Kids were a success.
Suddenly I felt that I could remain no longer. I must get out into
the air. I suggested leaving to Poirot.
Go by all means, mon ami . I amuse myself, and will stay to the
end. I will rejoin you later.
It was only a few steps from the theatre to the hotel. I went up
to the sitting room, ordered a whisky and soda, and sat drinking
it, staring meditatively into the empty grate. I heard the door
open, and turned my head, thinking it was Poirot. Then I jumped
to my feet. It was Cinderella who stood in the doorway. She spoke
haltingly, her breath coming in little gasps.
I saw you in front. You and your friend. When you got up to go,
I was waiting outside and followed you. Why are you here in
Coventry? What were you doing there to night? Is the man who was
with you the the detective?
She stood there, the cloak she had wrapped round her stage dress
slipping from her shoulders. I saw the whiteness of her cheeks under
the rouge, and heard the terror in her voice. And in that moment
I understood everything understood why Poirot was seeking her,
and what she feared, and understood at last my own heart. . . .
Yes, I said gently.
Is he looking for me? she half whispered.
Then, as I did not answer for a moment, she slipped down by the
big chair, and burst into violent, bitter weeping.
I knelt down by her, holding her in my arms, and smoothing the hair
back from her face.
Don t cry, child, don t cry, for God s sake. You re safe here. I ll
take care of you. Don t cry, darling. Don t cry. I know I know
everything.
Oh, but you don t!
I think I do. And after a moment, as her sobs grew quieter,
I asked: It was you who took the dagger, wasn t it?
Yes.
That was why you wanted me to show you round? And why you pretended
to faint?
Again she nodded. It was a strange thought to come to me at the
moment, but it shot into my mind that I was glad her motive was what
it had been rather than the idle and morbid curiosity I had accused
her of at the time. How gallantly she had played her part that day,
inwardly racked with fear and trepidation as she must have been. Poor
little soul, bearing the burden of a moment s impetuous action.
Why did you take the dagger? I asked presently.
She replied as simply as a child:
I was afraid there might be finger marks on it.
But didn t you remember that you had worn gloves?
She shook her head as though bewildered, and then said slowly:
Are you going to give me up to to the Police?
Good God! no.
Her eyes sought mine long and earnestly, and then she asked in a
little quiet voice that sounded afraid of itself:
Why not?
It seemed a strange place and a strange time for a declaration of
love and God knows, in all my imagining, I had never pictured love
coming to me in such a guise. But I answered simply and naturally
enough:
Because I love you, Cinderella.
She bent her head down, as though ashamed, and muttered in a
broken voice:
You can t you can t not if you knew And then, as though
rallying herself, she faced me squarely, and asked:
What do you know, then?
I know that you came to see Mr. Renauld that night. He offered you
a cheque and you tore it up indignantly. Then you left the house
I paused.
Go on what next?
I don t know whether you knew that Jack Renauld would be coming that
night, or whether you just waited about on the chance of seeing him,
but you did wait about. Perhaps you were just miserable, and walked
aimlessly but at any rate just before twelve you were still near
there, and you saw a man on the golf links
Again I paused. I had leapt to the truth in a flash as she
entered the room, but now the picture rose before me even more
convincingly. I saw vividly the peculiar pattern of the overcoat
on the dead body of Mr. Renauld, and I remembered the amazing
likeness that had startled me into believing for one instant that
the dead man had risen from the dead when his son burst into our
conclave in the salon .
Go on, repeated the girl steadily.
I fancy his back was to you but you recognized him, or thought you
recognized him. The gait and the carriage were familiar to you, and
the pattern of his overcoat. I paused. You told me in the train
on the way from Paris that you had Italian blood in your veins,
and that you had nearly got into trouble once with it. You used
a threat in one of your letters to Jack Renauld. When you saw him
there, your anger and jealousy drove you mad and you struck! I
don t believe for a minute that you meant to kill him. But you did
kill him, Cinderella.
She had flung up her hands to cover her face, and in a choked voice
she said:
You re right . . . you re right . . . I can see it all as you
tell it. Then she turned on me almost savagely. And you love
me? Knowing what you do, how can you love me?
I don t know, I said a little wearily. I think love is like
that a thing one cannot help. I have tried, I know ever since
the first day I met you. And love has been too strong for me.
And then suddenly, when I least expected it, she broke down again,
casting herself down on the floor and sobbing wildly.
Oh, I can t! she cried. I don t know what to do. I don t know
which way to turn. Oh, pity me, pity me, some one, and tell me what
to do!
Again I knelt by her, soothing her as best I could.
Don t be afraid of me, Bella. For God s sake don t be afraid
of me. I love you, that s true but I don t want anything in
return. Only let me help you. Love him still if you have to, but
let me help you as he can t.
It was as though she had been turned to stone by my words. She
raised her head from her hands and stared at me.
You think that? she whispered. You think that I love Jack
Renauld?
Then, half laughing, half crying, she flung her arms passionately
round my neck, and pressed her sweet wet face to mine.
Not as I love you, she whispered. Never as I love you!
Her lips brushed my cheek, and then, seeking my mouth, kissed me
again and again with a sweetness and fire beyond belief. The wildness
of it and the wonder, I shall not forget no, not as long as I live!
It was a sound in the doorway that made us look up. Poirot was
standing there looking at us.
I did not hesitate. With a bound I reached him and pinioned his
arms to his sides.
Quick, I said to the girl. Get out of here. As fast as you
can. I ll hold him.
With one look at me, she fled out of the room past us. I held
Poirot in a grip of iron.
Mon ami , observed the latter mildly, you do this sort of thing
very well. The strong man holds me in his grasp and I am helpless as
a child. But all this is uncomfortable and slightly ridiculous. Let
us sit down and be calm.
You won t pursue her?
Mon Dieu! no. Am I Giraud? Release me, my friend.
Keeping a suspicious eye upon him, for I paid Poirot the compliment
of knowing that I was no match for him in astuteness, I relaxed my
grip, and he sank into an arm chair, feeling his arms tenderly.
It is that you have the strength of a bull when you are roused,
Hastings! Eh bien , and do you think you have behaved well to your
old friend? I show you the girl s photograph and you recognize it,
but you never say a word.
There was no need if you knew that I recognized it, I said rather
bitterly. So Poirot had known all along! I had not deceived him
for an instant.
Ta ta! You did not know that I knew that. And tonight you help
the girl to escape when we have found her with so much trouble! Eh
bien! it comes to this are you going to work with me or against
me, Hastings?
For a moment or two I did not answer. To break with my old friend
gave me great pain. Yet I must definitely range myself against
him. Would he ever forgive me, I wondered? He had been strangely
calm so far, but I knew him to possess marvellous self command.
Poirot, I said, I m sorry. I admit I ve behaved badly to you
over this. But sometimes one has no choice. And in future I must
take my own line.
Poirot nodded his head several times.
I understand, he said. The mocking light had quite died out of
his eyes, and he spoke with a sincerity and kindness that surprised
me. It is that, my friend, is it not? It is love that has come not
as you imagined it, all cock a hoop with fine feathers, but sadly,
with bleeding feet. Well, well I warned you. When I realized that
this girl must have taken the dagger, I warned you. Perhaps you
remember. But already it was too late. But, tell me, how much do
you know?
I met his eyes squarely.
Nothing that you could tell me would be any surprise to me,
Poirot. Understand that. But in case you think of resuming
your search for Miss Duveen, I should like you to know one thing
clearly. If you have any idea that she was concerned in the crime,
or was the mysterious lady who called upon Mr. Renauld that night,
you are wrong. I travelled home from France with her that day,
and parted from her at Victoria that evening so that it is clearly
impossible for her to have been in Merlinville.
Ah! Poirot looked at me thoughtfully. And you would swear to
that in a court of law?
Most certainly I would.
Poirot rose and bowed.
Mon ami! Vive l amour! It can perform miracles. It is decidedly
ingenious what you have thought of there. It defeats even Hercule
Poirot!
23
Difficulties Ahead
After a moment of stress, such as I have just described, reaction is
bound to set in. I retired to rest that night on a note of triumph,
but I awoke to realize that I was by no means out of the wood. True,
I could see no flaw in the alibi I had so suddenly conceived. I
had but to stick to my story, and I failed to see how Bella could
be convicted in face of it. It was not as though there was any old
friendship between us that could be raked up, and which might lead
them to suspect that I was committing perjury. It could be proved
that in actual fact I had only seen the girl on three occasions. No,
I was still satisfied with my idea had not even Poirot admitted
that it defeated him?
But there I felt the need of treading warily. All very well for
my little friend to admit himself momentarily nonplussed. I had
far too much respect for his abilities to conceive of him as being
content to remain in that position. I had a very humble opinion
of my wits when it came to matching them against his. Poirot would
not take defeat lying down. Somehow or other, he would endeavour
to turn the tables on me, and that in the way, and at the moment,
when I least expected it.
We met at breakfast the following morning as though nothing had
happened. Poirot s good temper was imperturbable, yet I thought
I detected a film of reserve in his manner which was new. After
breakfast, I announced my intention of going out for a stroll. A
malicious gleam shot through Poirot s eyes.
If it is information you seek, you need not be at the pains
of deranging yourself. I can tell you all you wish to know. The
Dulcibella Sisters have cancelled their contract, and have left
Coventry for an unknown destination.
Is that really so, Poirot?
You can take it from me, Hastings. I made inquiries the first
thing this morning. After all, what else did you expect?
True enough, nothing else could be expected under the
circumstances. Cinderella had profited by the slight start I had
been able to assure her, and would certainly not lose a moment in
removing herself from the reach of the pursuer. It was what I had
intended and planned. Nevertheless, I was aware of being plunged
into a network of fresh difficulties.
I had absolutely no means of communicating with the girl, and
it was vital that she should know the line of defence that had
occurred to me, and which I was prepared to carry out. Of course
it was possible that she might try to send word to me in some way
or another, but I hardly thought it likely. She would know the risk
she ran of a message being intercepted by Poirot, thus setting him
on her track once more. Clearly her only course was to disappear
utterly for the time being.
But, in the meantime, what was Poirot doing? I studied him
attentively. He was wearing his most innocent air, and staring
meditatively into the far distance. He looked altogether too placid
and supine to give me reassurance. I had learned, with Poirot,
that the less dangerous he looked, the more dangerous he was. His
quiescence alarmed me. Observing a troubled quality in my glance,
he smiled benignantly.
You are puzzled, Hastings? You ask yourself why I do not launch
myself in pursuit?
Well something of the kind.
It is what you would do, were you in my place. I understand
that. But I am not of those who enjoy rushing up and down a
country seeking a needle in a haystack, as you English say. No let
Mademoiselle Bella Duveen go. Without doubt, I shall be able to
find her when the time comes. Until then, I am content to wait.
I stared at him doubtfully. Was he seeking to mislead me? I had an
irritating feeling that, even now, he was master of the situation. My
sense of superiority was gradually waning. I had contrived the
girl s escape, and evolved a brilliant scheme for saving her from
the consequences of her rash act but I could not rest easy in my
mind. Poirot s perfect calm awakened a thousand apprehensions.
I suppose, Poirot, I said rather diffidently, I mustn t ask what
your plans are? I ve forfeited the right.
But not at all. There is no secret about them. We return to France
without delay.
We?
Precisely we! You know very well that you cannot afford to
let Papa Poirot out of your sight. Eh, is it not so, my friend? But
remain in England by all means if you wish
I shook my head. He had hit the nail on the head. I could not
afford to let him out of my sight. Although I could not expect
his confidence after what had happened, I could still check his
actions. The only danger to Bella lay with him. Giraud and the
French police were indifferent to her existence. At all costs I
must keep near Poirot.
Poirot observed me attentively as these reflections passed through
my mind, and gave a nod of satisfaction.
I am right, am I not? And as you are quite capable of trying to
follow me, disguised with some absurdity such as a false beard which
every one would perceive, bien entendu I much prefer that we
should voyage together. It would annoy me greatly that any one
should mock themselves at you.
Very well, then. But it s only fair to warn you
I know I know all. You are my enemy! Be my enemy then. It does
not worry me at all.
So long as it s all fair and above board, I don t mind.
You have to the full the English passion for fair play! Now your
scruples are satisfied, let us depart immediately. There is no time
to be lost. Our stay in England has been short but sufficient. I
know what I wanted to know.
The tone was light, but I read a veiled menace into the words.
Still I began, and stopped.
Still as you say! Without doubt you are satisfied with the part
you are playing. Me, I preoccupy myself with Jack Renauld.
Jack Renauld! The words gave me a start. I had completely forgotten
that aspect of the case. Jack Renauld, in prison, with the shadow
of the guillotine looming over him! I saw the part I was playing
in a more sinister light. I could save Bella yes, but in doing so
I ran the risk of sending an innocent man to his death.
I pushed the thought from me with horror. It could not be. He would
be acquitted. Certainly he would be acquitted! But the cold fear
came back. Suppose he were not? What then? Could I have it on my
conscience horrible thought! Would it come to that in the end? A
decision. Bella or Jack Renauld? The promptings of my heart were
to save the girl I loved at any cost to myself. But, if the cost
were to another, the problem was altered.
What would the girl herself say? I remembered that no word of
Jack Renauld s arrest had passed my lips. As yet she was in total
ignorance of the fact that her former lover was in prison charged
with a hideous crime which he had not committed. When she knew,
how would she act? Would she permit her life to be saved at the
expense of his? Certainly she must do nothing rash. Jack Renauld
might, and probably would, be acquitted without any intervention
on her part. If so, good. But if he was not. . . . That was the
terrible, the unanswerable problem. I fancied that she ran no
risk of the extreme penalty. The circumstances of the crime were
quite different in her case. She could plead jealousy and extreme
provocation, and her youth and beauty would go for much. The fact
that by a tragic mistake it was old Mr. Renauld, and not his son,
who paid the penalty would not alter the motive of the crime. But
in any case, however lenient the sentence of the Court, it must
mean a long term of imprisonment.
No, Bella must be protected. And, at the same time, Jack Renauld must
be saved. How this was to be accomplished I did not see clearly. But
I pinned my faith to Poirot. He knew. Come what might, he would
manage to save an innocent man. He must find some pretext other
than the real one. It might be difficult, but he would manage it
somehow. And with Bella unsuspected, and Jack Renauld acquitted,
all would end satisfactorily.
So I told myself repeatedly, but at the bottom of my heart there
still remained a cold fear.
24
Save Him!
We crossed from England by the evening boat, and the following
morning saw us in Saint Omer, whither Jack Renauld had been
taken. Poirot lost no time in visiting M. Hautet. As he did not
seem disposed to make any objections to my accompanying him, I bore
him company.
After various formalities and preliminaries, we were conducted to
the examining magistrate s room. He greeted us cordially.
I was told that you had returned to England, M. Poirot. I am glad
to find that such is not the case.
It is true that I went there, M. le juge, but it was only for
a flying visit. A side issue, but one that I fancied might repay
investigation.
And it did eh?
Poirot shrugged his shoulders. M. Hautet nodded, sighing.
We must resign ourselves, I fear. That animal Giraud, his manners
are abominable, but he is undoubtedly clever! Not much chance of
that one making a mistake.
You think not, M. le juge?
It was the examining magistrate s turn to shrug his shoulders.
Eh bien , speaking frankly in confidence, c est entendu can
you come to any other conclusion?
Frankly, M. le juge, there seem to me to be many points that
are obscure.
Such as ?
But Poirot was not to be drawn.
I have not yet tabulated them, he remarked. It was a general
reflection that I was making. I liked the young man, and should be
sorry to believe him guilty of such a hideous crime. By the way,
what has he to say for himself on the matter?
The magistrate frowned.
I cannot understand him. He seems incapable of putting up any
sort of defence. It has been most difficult to get him to answer
questions. He contents himself with a general denial, and beyond
that takes refuge in a most obstinate silence. I am interrogating
him again tomorrow; perhaps you would like to be present?
We accepted the invitation with empressement .
A distressing case, said the magistrate with a sigh. My sympathy
for Madame Renauld is profound.
How is Madame Renauld?
She has not yet recovered consciousness. It is merciful in a way,
poor woman, she is being spared much. The doctors say that there is
no danger, but that when she comes to herself she must be kept as
quiet as possible. It was, I understand, quite as much the shock
as the fall which caused her present state. It would be terrible
if her brain became unhinged; but I should not wonder at all no,
really, not at all.
M. Hautet leaned back, shaking his head, with a sort of mournful
enjoyment, as he envisaged the gloomy prospect.
He roused himself at length, and observed with a start.
That reminds me. I have here a letter for you, M. Poirot. Let me
see, where did I put it?
He proceeded to rummage amongst his papers. At last he found the
missive, and handed it to Poirot.
It was sent under cover to me in order that I might forward it to
you, he explained. But as you left no address I could not do so.
Poirot studied the letter curiously. It was addressed in a
long, sloping, foreign hand, and the writing was decidedly a
woman s. Poirot did not open it. Instead he put it in his pocket
and rose to his feet.
A demain then, M. le juge. Many thanks for your courtesy and
amiability.
But not at all. I am always at your service. These young
detectives of the school of Giraud, they are all alike rude,
sneering fellows. They do not realize that an examining magistrate
of my er experience is bound to have a certain discernment,
a certain flair . Enfin! the politeness of the old school is
infinitely more to my taste. Therefore, my dear friend, command me
in any way you will. We know a thing or two, you and I eh?
And laughing heartily, enchanted with himself and with us, M. Hautet
bade us adieu. I am sorry to have to record that Poirot s first
remark to me as we traversed the corridor was:
A famous old imbecile, that one! Of a stupidity to make pity!
We were just leaving the building when we came face to face with
Giraud, looking more dandified than ever, and thoroughly pleased
with himself.
Aha! M. Poirot, he cried airily. You have returned from England
then?
As you see, said Poirot.
The end of the case is not far off now, I fancy.
I agree with you, M. Giraud.
Poirot spoke in a subdued tone. His crest fallen manner seemed to
delight the other.
Of all the milk and water criminals! Not an idea of defending
himself. It is extraordinary!
So extraordinary that it gives one to think, does it not? suggested
Poirot mildly.
But Giraud was not even listening. He twirled his cane amicably.
Well, good day, M. Poirot. I am glad you re satisfied of young
Renauld s guilt at last.
Pardon! But I am not in the least satisfied. Jack Renauld is
innocent.
Giraud stared for a moment then burst out laughing, tapping his
head significantly with the brief remark: Toqu !
Poirot drew himself up. A dangerous light showed in his eyes.
M. Giraud, throughout the case your manner to me has been
deliberately insulting! You need teaching a lesson. I am prepared to
wager you 500 francs that I find the murderer of M. Renauld before
you do. Is it agreed?
Giraud stared helplessly at him, and murmured again:
Toqu !
Come now, urged Poirot, is it agreed?
I have no wish to take your money from you.
Make your mind easy you will not!
Oh, well then, I agree! You speak of my manner to you being
insulting. Eh bien , once or twice, your manner has annoyed me .
I am enchanted to hear it, said Poirot. Good morning,
M. Giraud. Come, Hastings.
I said no word as we walked along the street. My heart was
heavy. Poirot had displayed his intentions only too plainly. I
doubted more than ever my powers of saving Bella from the
consequences of her act. This unlucky encounter with Giraud had
roused Poirot and put him on his mettle.
Suddenly I felt a hand laid on my shoulder, and turned to face
Gabriel Stonor. We stopped and greeted him, and he proposed strolling
with us back to our hotel.
And what are you doing here, M. Stonor? inquired Poirot.
One must stand by one s friends, replied the other
dryly. Especially when they are unjustly accused.
Then you do not believe that Jack Renauld committed the crime? I
asked eagerly.
Certainly I don t. I know the lad. I admit that there have been one
or two things in this business that have staggered me completely,
but none the less, in spite of his fool way of taking it, I ll
never believe that Jack Renauld is a murderer.
My heart warmed to the secretary. His words seemed to lift a secret
weight from my heart.
I have no doubt that many people feel as you do, I
exclaimed. There is really absurdly little evidence against
him. I should say that there was no doubt of his acquittal no
doubt whatever.
But Stonor hardly responded as I could have wished.
I d give a lot to think as you do, he said gravely. He turned
to Poirot. What s your opinion, monsieur?
I think that things look very black against him, said Poirot
quietly.
You believe him guilty? said Stonor sharply.
No. But I think he will find it hard to prove his innocence.
He s behaving so damned queerly, muttered Stonor. Of course
I realize that there s a lot more in this affair than meets the
eye. Giraud s not wise to that because he s an outsider, but the
whole thing has been damned odd. As to that, least said soonest
mended. If Mrs. Renauld wants to hush anything up, I ll take my
cue from her. It s her show, and I ve too much respect for her
judgment to shove my oar in, but I can t get behind this attitude
of Jack s. Any one would think he wanted to be thought guilty.
But it s absurd, I cried, bursting in. For one thing, the
dagger I paused, uncertain as to how much Poirot would wish me
to reveal. I continued, choosing my words carefully, We know that
the dagger could not have been in Jack Renauld s possession that
evening. Mrs. Renauld knows that.
True, said Stonor. When she recovers, she will doubtless say
all this and more. Well, I must be leaving you.
One moment. Poirot s hand arrested his departure. Can you
arrange for word to be sent to me at once should Madame Renauld
recover consciousness?
Certainly. That s easily done.
That point about the dagger is good, Poirot, I urged as we went
upstairs. I couldn t speak very plainly before Stonor.
That was quite right of you. We might as well keep the knowledge
to ourselves as long as we can. As to the dagger, your point hardly
helps Jack Renauld. You remember that I was absent for an hour this
morning, before we started from London?
Yes?
Well, I was employed in trying to find the firm Jack Renauld
employed to convert his souvenirs. It was not very difficult. Eh
bien , Hastings, they made to his order not two paper knives,
but three .
So that ?
So that, after giving one to his mother, and one to Bella Duveen,
there was a third which he doubtless retained for his own use. No,
Hastings, I fear the dagger question will not help us to save him
from the guillotine.
It won t come to that, I cried, stung.
Poirot shook his head uncertainly.
You will save him, I cried positively.
Poirot glanced at me dryly.
Have you not rendered it impossible, mon ami ?
Some other way, I muttered.
Ah! Sapristi! But it is miracles you ask from me. No say no
more. Let us instead see what is in this letter.
And he drew out the envelope from his breast pocket.
His face contracted as he read, then he handed the one flimsy sheet
to me.
There are other women in the world who suffer, Hastings.
The writing was blurred and the note had evidently been written in
great agitation:
Dear M. Poirot:
If you get this, I beg of you to come to my aid. I have no one to
turn to, and at all costs Jack must be saved. I implore of you on
my knees to help us.
MARTHE DAUBREUIL.
I handed it back, moved.
You will go?
At once. We will command an auto.
Half an hour later saw us at the Villa Marguerite. Marthe was at
the door to meet us, and led Poirot in, clinging with both hands
to one of his.
Ah, you have come it is good of you. I have been in despair, not
knowing what to do. They will not let me go to see him in prison
even. I suffer horribly, I am nearly mad. Is it true what they
say, that he does not deny the crime? But that is madness. It is
impossible that he should have done it! Never for one minute will
I believe it.
Neither do I believe it, mademoiselle, said Poirot gently.
But then why does he not speak? I do not understand.
Perhaps because he is screening some one, suggested Poirot,
watching her.
Marthe frowned.
Screening some one? Do you mean his mother? Ah, from the beginning I
have suspected her. Who inherits all that vast fortune? She does. It
is easy to wear widow s weeds and play the hypocrite. And they say
that when he was arrested she fell down like that . She made a
dramatic gesture. And without doubt, M. Stonor, the secretary,
he helped her. They are thick as thieves, those two. It is true
she is older than he but what do men care if a woman is rich!
There was a hint of bitterness in her tone.
Stonor was in England, I put in.
He says so but who knows?
Mademoiselle, said Poirot quietly, if we are to work together, you
and I, we must have things clear. First, I will ask you a question.
Yes, monsieur?
Are you aware of your mother s real name?
Marthe looked at him for a minute, then, letting her head fall
forward on her arms, she burst into tears.
There, there, said Poirot, patting her on the shoulder. Calm
yourself, petite , I see that you know. Now a second question,
did you know who M. Renauld was?
M. Renauld, she raised her head from her hands and gazed at
him wonderingly.
Ah, I see you do not know that. Now listen to me carefully.
Step by step, he went over the case, much as he had done to me on the
day of our departure for England. Marthe listened spellbound. When
he had finished, she drew a long breath.
But you are wonderful magnificent! You are the greatest detective
in the world.
With a swift gesture she slipped off her chair and knelt before
him with an abandonment that was wholly French.
Save him, monsieur, she cried. I love him so. Oh, save him,
save him save him!
25
An Unexpected D nouement
We were present the following morning at the examination of Jack
Renauld. Short as the time had been, I was shocked at the change
that had taken place in the young prisoner. His cheeks had fallen
in, there were deep black circles round his eyes, and he looked
haggard and distraught, as one who had wooed sleep in vain for
several nights. He betrayed no emotion at seeing us.
The prisoner and his counsel, Ma tre Gros er, were accommodated
with chairs. A formidable guard with resplendent sabre stood before
the door. The patient greffier sat at his desk. The examination
began.
Renauld, began the magistrate, do you deny that you were in
Merlinville on the night of the crime?
Jack did not reply at once, then he said with a hesitancy of manner
which was piteous:
I I told you that I was in Cherbourg.
Ma tre Gros er frowned and sighed. I realized at once that Jack
Renauld was obstinately bent on conducting his own case as he wished,
to the despair of his legal representative.
The magistrate turned sharply.
Send in the station witnesses.
In a moment or two the door opened to admit a man whom I recognized
as being a porter at Merlinville station.
You were on duty on the night of June 7th?
Yes, monsieur.
You witnessed the arrival of the 11:40 train?
Yes, monsieur.
Look at the prisoner. Do you recognize him as having been one of
the passengers to alight?
Yes, Monsieur le juge.
There is no possibility of your being mistaken?
No, monsieur. I knew M. Jack Renauld well.
Nor of your being mistaken as to the date?
No, monsieur. Because it was the following morning, June 8th,
that we heard of the murder.
Another railway official was brought in, and confirmed the first
one s evidence. The magistrate looked at Jack Renauld.
These men have identified you positively. What have you to say?
Jack shrugged his shoulders.
Nothing.
M. Hautet exchanged a glance with the greffier , as the scratching
of the latter s pen recorded the answer.
Renauld, continued the magistrate, do you recognize this?
He took something from the table by his side, and held it out to
the prisoner. I shuddered as I recognized the aeroplane dagger.
Pardon, cried Ma tre Gros er. I demand to speak to my client
before he answers that question.
But Jack Renauld had no consideration for the feelings of the
wretched Gros er. He waved him aside, and replied quietly:
Certainly I recognize it. It is a present given by me to my mother,
as a souvenir of the War.
Is there, as far as you know, any duplicate of that dagger in
existence?
Again Ma tre Gros er burst out, and again Jack overrode him.
Not that I know of. The setting was my own design.
Even the magistrate almost gasped at the boldness of the reply. It
did, in very truth, seem as though Jack was rushing on his fate. I
realized, of course, the vital necessity he was under of concealing,
for Bella s sake, the fact that there was a duplicate dagger in
the case. So long as there was supposed to be only one weapon, no
suspicion was likely to attach to the girl who had had the second
paper knife in her possession. He was valiantly shielding the woman
he had once loved but at what a cost to himself! I began to realize
the magnitude of the task I had so lightly set Poirot. It would
not be easy to secure the acquittal of Jack Renauld, by anything
short of the truth.
M. Hautet spoke again, with a peculiarly biting inflection:
Madame Renauld told us that this dagger was on her dressing table
on the night of the crime. But Madame Renauld is a mother! It will
doubtless astonish you, Renauld, but I consider it highly likely that
Madame Renauld was mistaken, and that, by inadvertence perhaps, you
had taken it with you to Paris. Doubtless you will contradict me
I saw the lad s handcuffed hands clench themselves. The perspiration
stood out in beads upon his brow, as with a supreme effort he
interrupted M. Hautet in a hoarse voice:
I shall not contradict you. It is possible.
It was a stupefying moment. Ma tre Gros er rose to his feet,
protesting:
My client has undergone a considerable nervous strain. I should
wish it put on record that I do not consider him answerable for
what he says.
The magistrate quelled him angrily. For a moment a doubt seemed to
arise in his own mind. Jack Renauld had almost overdone his part. He
leaned forward, and gazed at the prisoner searchingly.
Do you fully understand, Renauld, that on the answers you have
given me I shall have no alternative but to commit you for trial?
Jack s pale face flushed. He looked steadily back.
M. Hautet, I swear that I did not kill my father.
But the magistrate s brief moment of doubt was over. He laughed
a short, unpleasant laugh.
Without doubt, without doubt they are always innocent, our
prisoners! By your own mouth you are condemned. You can offer no
defence, no alibi only a mere assertion which would not deceive a
babe! that you are not guilty. You killed your father, Renauld
cruel and cowardly murder for the sake of money which you believed
would come to you at his death. Your mother was an accessory after
the fact. Doubtless, in view of the fact that she acted as a mother,
the courts will extend an indulgence to her that they will not accord
to you. And rightly so! Your crime was a horrible one to be held
in abhorrence by gods and men! M. Hautet was enjoying himself,
working up his period, steeped in the solemnity of the moment, and
his own role as representative of justice. You killed and you must
pay the consequences of your action. I speak to you, not as a man,
but as Justice, eternal Justice, which
M. Hautet was interrupted to his intense annoyance. The door was
pushed open.
M. le juge, M. le juge, stammered the attendant, there is a lady
who says who says
Who says what? cried the justly incensed magistrate. This is
highly irregular. I forbid it I absolutely forbid it.
But a slender figure pushed the stammering gendarme aside. Dressed
all in black, with a long veil that hid her face, she advanced into
the room.
My heart gave a sickening throb. She had come then! All my efforts
were in vain. Yet I could not but admire the courage that had led
her to take this step so unfalteringly.
She raised her veil and I gasped. For, though as like her as two
peas, this girl was not Cinderella! On the other hand, now that I
saw her without the fair wig she had worn on the stage, I recognized
her as the girl of the photograph in Jack Renauld s room.
You are the Juge d Instruction, M. Hautet? she queried.
Yes, but I forbid
My name is Bella Duveen. I wish to give myself up for the murder
of Mr. Renauld.
26
I Receive a Letter
My Friend:
You will know all when you get this. Nothing that I can say will
move Bella. She has gone out to give herself up. I am tired out
with struggling.
You will know now that I deceived you, that where you gave me
trust I repaid you with lies. It will seem, perhaps, indefensible
to you, but I should like, before I go out of your life for ever,
to show you just how it all came about. If I knew that you forgave
me, it would make life easier for me. It wasn t for myself I did
it that s the only thing I can put forward to say for myself.
I ll begin from the day I met you in the boat train from Paris. I
was uneasy then about Bella. She was just desperate about Jack
Renauld, she d have lain down on the ground for him to walk on, and
when he began to change, and to stop writing so often, she began
getting in a state. She got it into her head that he was keen on
another girl and of course, as it turned out afterwards, she was
quite right there. She d made up her mind to go to their Villa
at Merlinville, and try and see Jack. She knew I was against it,
and tried to give me the slip. I found she was not on the train at
Calais, and determined I would not go on to England without her.
I d an uneasy feeling that something awful was going to happen if
I couldn t prevent it.
I met the next train from Paris. She was on it, and set upon going
out then and there to Merlinville. I argued with her for all I
was worth, but it wasn t any good. She was all strung up and set
upon having her own way. Well, I washed my hands of it. I d done
all I could! It was getting late. I went to an hotel, and Bella
started for Merlinville. I still couldn t shake off my feeling of
what the books call impending disaster.
The next day came but no Bella. She d made a date with me to meet
at the hotel, but she didn t keep it. No sign of her all day. I
got more and more anxious. Then came an evening paper with the news.
It was awful! I couldn t be sure, of course but I was terribly
afraid. I figured it out that Bella had met Papa Renauld and told
him about her and Jack, and that he d insulted her or something
like that. We ve both got terribly quick tempers.
Then all the masked foreigner business came out, and I began to
feel more at ease. But it still worried me that Bella hadn t kept
her date with me.
By the next morning, I was so rattled that I d just got to go
and see what I could. First thing, I ran up against you. You know
all that . . . When I saw the dead man, looking so like Jack, and
wearing Jack s fancy overcoat, I knew! And there was the identical
paper knife wicked little thing! that Jack had given Bella! Ten
to one it had her finger marks on it. I can t hope to explain to
you the sort of helpless horror of that moment. I only saw one
thing clearly I must get hold of that dagger, and get right away
with it before they found out it was gone. I pretended to faint,
and whilst you were away getting water I took the thing and hid it
away in my dress.
I told you that I was staying at the H tel du Phare, but of course
really I made a bee line back to Calais, and then on to England by
the first boat. When we were in mid Channel, I dropped that little
devil of a dagger into the sea. Then I felt I could breathe again.
Bella was at our digs in London. She looked like nothing on God s
earth. I told her what I d done, and that she was pretty safe for the
time being. She stared at me, and then began laughing . . . laughing
. . . laughing . . . it was horrible to hear her! I felt that the
best thing to do was to keep busy. She d go mad if she had time to
brood on what she d done. Luckily we got an engagement at once.
And then, I saw you and your friend, watching us that night . . . I
was frantic. You must suspect, or you wouldn t have tracked us
down. I had to know the worst, so I followed you. I was desperate.
And then, before I d had time to say anything, I tumbled to it that
it was me you suspected, not Bella! Or at least that you thought
I was Bella since I d stolen the dagger.
I wish, honey, that you could see back into my mind at that
moment . . . you d forgive me, perhaps . . . I was so frightened,
and muddled, and desperate. . . . All I could get clearly was that
you would try and save me. I didn t know whether you d be willing
to save her . . . I thought very likely not it wasn t the same
thing! And I couldn t risk it! Bella s my twin I d got to do the
best for her. So I went on lying. . . . I felt mean I feel mean
still. . . . That s all enough too, you ll say, I expect. I ought
to have trusted you. . . . If I had
As soon as the news was in the paper that Jack Renauld had been
arrested, it was all up. Bella wouldn t even wait to see how things
went. . . .
I m very tired. . . . I can t write any more. . . .
She had begun to sign herself Cinderella, but had crossed that out
and written instead Dulcie Duveen.
It was an ill written, blurred epistle but I have kept it to
this day.
Poirot was with me when I read it. The sheets fell from my hand,
and I looked across at him.
Did you know all the time that it was the other?
Yes, my friend.
Why did you not tell me?
To begin with, I could hardly believe it conceivable that you could
make such a mistake. You had seen the photograph. The sisters are
very alike, but by no means incapable of distinguishment.
But the fair hair?
A wig, worn for the sake of a piquant contrast on the stage. Is
it conceivable that with twins one should be fair and one dark?
Why didn t you tell me that night at the hotel in Coventry?
You were rather high handed in your methods, mon ami , said
Poirot dryly. You did not give me a chance.
But afterwards?
Ah, afterwards! Well, to begin with, I was hurt at your want of
faith in me. And then, I wanted to see whether your feelings would
stand the test of time. In fact, whether it was love, or a flash in
the pan, with you. I should not have left you long in your error.
I nodded. His tone was too affectionate for me to bear resentment. I
looked down on the sheets of the letter. Suddenly I picked them up
from the floor, and pushed them across to him.
Read that, I said. I d like you to.
He read it through in silence, then he looked up at me.
What is it that worries you, Hastings.
This was quite a new mood in Poirot. His mocking manner seemed
laid quite aside. I was able to say what I wanted without too
much difficulty.
She doesn t say she doesn t say well, not whether she cares for
me or not!
Poirot turned back the pages.
I think you are mistaken, Hastings.
Where? I cried, leaning forward eagerly.
Poirot smiled.
She tells you that in every line of the letter, mon ami .
But where am I to find her? There s no address on the
letter. There s a French stamp, that s all.
Excite yourself not! Leave it to Papa Poirot. I can find her for
you as soon as I have five little minutes!
27
Jack Renauld s Story
Congratulations, M. Jack, said Poirot, wringing the lad warmly
by the hand.
Young Renauld had come to us as soon as he was liberated before
starting for Merlinville to rejoin Marthe and his mother. Stonor
accompanied him. His heartiness was in strong contrast to the
lad s wan looks. It was plain that the boy was on the verge of
a nervous breakdown. Although delivered from the immediate peril
that was hanging over him, the circumstances of his release were
too painful to let him feel full relief. He smiled mournfully at
Poirot, and said in a low voice:
I went through it to protect her, and now it s all no use!
You could hardly expect the girl to accept the price of your life,
remarked Stonor dryly. She was bound to come forward when she saw
you heading straight for the guillotine.
Eh ma foi! and you were heading for it too! added Poirot, with
a slight twinkle. You would have had Ma tre Gros er s death from
rage on your conscience if you had gone on.
He was a well meaning ass, I suppose, said Jack. But he
worried me horribly. You see, I couldn t very well take him into
my confidence. But, my God! what s going to happen about Bella?
If I were you, said Poirot frankly, I should not distress myself
unduly. The French Courts are very lenient to youth and beauty,
and the crime passionnel . A clever lawyer will make out a great
case of extenuating circumstances. It will not be pleasant for you
I don t care about that. You see, M. Poirot, in a way I do feel
guilty of my father s murder. But for me, and my entanglement with
this girl, he would be alive and well today. And then my cursed
carelessness in taking away the wrong overcoat. I can t help feeling
responsible for his death. It will haunt me for ever!
No, no, I said soothingly.
Of course it s horrible to me to think that Bella killed my father,
resumed Jack, but I d treated her shamefully. After I met Marthe,
and realized I d made a mistake, I ought to have written and told her
so honestly. But I was so terrified of a row, and of its coming to
Marthe s ears, and her thinking there was more in it than there ever
had been, that well, I was a coward, and went on hoping the thing
would die down of itself. I just drifted, in fact not realizing
that I was driving the poor kid desperate. If she d really knifed
me, as she meant to, I should have got no more than my deserts.
And the way she s come forward now is downright plucky. I d have
stood the racket, you know up to the end.
He was silent for a moment or two, and then burst out on another
tack:
What gets me is why the Governor should be wandering about in
underclothes and my overcoat at that time of night. I suppose he d
just given the foreign johnnies the slip, and my mother must have
made a mistake about its being 2 o clock when they came. Or or,
it wasn t all a frame up, was it? I mean, my mother didn t
think couldn t think that that it was me ?
Poirot reassured him quickly.
No, no, M. Jack. Have no fears on that score. As for the rest, I
will explain it to you one of these days. It is rather curious. But
will you recount to us exactly what did occur on that terrible
evening?
There s very little to tell. I came from Cherbourg, as I told
you, in order to see Marthe before going to the other end of the
world. The train was late, and I decided to take the short cut
across the golf links. I could easily get into the grounds of the
Villa Marguerite from there. I had nearly reached the place when
He paused and swallowed.
Yes?
I heard a terrible cry. It wasn t loud a sort of choke and
gasp but it frightened me. For a moment I stood rooted to the
spot. Then I came round the corner of a bush. There was moonlight. I
saw the grave, and a figure lying face downwards, with a dagger
sticking in the back. And then and then I looked up and saw her .
She was looking at me as though she saw a ghost it s what she must
have thought me at first all expression seemed frozen out of her
face by horror. And then she gave a cry, and turned and ran.
He stopped, trying to master his emotion.
And afterwards? asked Poirot gently.
I really don t know. I stayed there for a time, dazed. And then
I realized I d better get away as fast as I could. It didn t occur
to me that they would suspect me, but I was afraid of being called
upon to give evidence against her. I walked to St. Beauvais as I
told you, and got a car from there back to Cherbourg.
A knock came at the door, and a page entered with a telegram which he
delivered to Stonor. He tore it open. Then he got up from his seat.
Mrs. Renauld has regained consciousness, he said.
Ah! Poirot sprang to his feet. Let us all go to Merlinville
at once!
A hurried departure was made forthwith. Stonor, at Jack s instance,
agreed to stay behind and do all that could be done for Bella
Duveen. Poirot, Jack Renauld and I set off in the Renauld car.
The run took just over forty minutes. As we approached the doorway
of the Villa Marguerite, Jack Renauld shot a questioning glance
at Poirot.
How would it be if you went on first to break the news to my
mother that I am free
While you break it in person to Mademoiselle Marthe, eh? finished
Poirot, with a twinkle. But yes, by all means, I was about to
propose such an arrangement myself.
Jack Renauld did not wait for more. Stopping the car, he swung
himself out, and ran up the path to the front door. We went on in
the car to the Villa Genevi ve.
Poirot, I said, do you remember how we arrived here that first
day? And were met by the news of M. Renauld s murder?
Ah! yes, truly. Not so long ago, either. But what a lot of things
have happened since then especially for you, mon ami !
Poirot, what have you done about finding Bel I mean Dulcie?
Calm yourself, Hastings. I arrange everything.
You re being a precious long time about it, I grumbled.
Poirot changed the subject.
Then the beginning, now the end, he moralized, as we rang
the bell. And, considered as a case, the end is profoundly
unsatisfactory.
Yes, indeed, I sighed.
You are regarding it from the sentimental standpoint, Hastings. That
was not my meaning. We will hope that Mademoiselle Bella will be
dealt with leniently, and after all Jack Renauld cannot marry both
the girls. I spoke from a professional standpoint. This is not a
crime well ordered and regular, such as a detective delights in. The
mise en sc ne designed by Georges Conneau, that indeed is perfect,
but the d nouement ah, no! A man killed by accident in a girl s
fit of anger ah, indeed, what order or method is there in that?
And in the midst of a fit of laughter on my part at Poirot s
peculiarities, the door was opened by Fran oise.
Poirot explained that he must see Mrs. Renauld at once, and the
old woman conducted him upstairs. I remained in the salon . It was
some time before Poirot reappeared. He was looking unusually grave.
Vous voil , Hastings! Sacr tonnerre , but there are squalls
ahead!
What do you mean? I cried.
I would hardly have credited it, said Poirot thoughtfully,
but women are very unexpected.
Here are Jack and Marthe Daubreuil, I exclaimed, looking out of
the window.
Poirot bounded out of the room, and met the young couple on the
steps outside.
Do not enter. It is better not. Your mother is very upset.
I know, I know, said Jack Renauld. I must go up to her at once.
But no, I tell you. It is better not.
But Marthe and I
In any case, do not take Mademoiselle with you. Mount, if you must,
but you would be wise to be guided by me.
A voice on the stairs behind made us all start.
I thank you for your good offices, M. Poirot, but I will make my
own wishes clear.
We stared in astonishment. Descending the stairs, leaning upon
L onie s arm, was Mrs. Renauld, her head still bandaged. The French
girl was weeping, and imploring her mistress to return to bed.
Madame will kill herself. It is contrary to all the doctor s
orders!
But Mrs. Renauld came on.
Mother, cried Jack, starting forward. But with a gesture she
drove him back.
I am no mother of yours! You are no son of mine! From this day
and hour I renounce you.
Mother, cried the lad, stupefied.
For a moment she seemed to waver, to falter before the anguish
in his voice. Poirot made a mediating gesture, but instantly she
regained command of herself.
Your father s blood is on your head. You are morally guilty of
his death. You thwarted and defied him over this girl, and by
your heartless treatment of another girl, you brought about his
death. Go out from my house. Tomorrow I intend to take such steps
as shall make it certain that you shall never touch a penny of his
money. Make your way in the world as best you can with the help of
the girl who is the daughter of your father s bitterest enemy!
And slowly, painfully, she retraced her way upstairs.
We were all dumbfounded totally unprepared for such a
demonstration. Jack Renauld, worn out with all he had already gone
through, swayed and nearly fell. Poirot and I went quickly to
his assistance.
He is overdone, murmured Poirot to Marthe. Where can we take
him?
But home! To the Villa Marguerite. We will nurse him, my mother
and I. My poor Jack!
We got the lad to the Villa, where he dropped limply on to a chair
in a semi dazed condition. Poirot felt his head and hands.
He has fever. The long strain begins to tell. And now this shock on
top of it. Get him to bed, and Hastings and I will summon a doctor.
A doctor was soon procured. After examining the patient, he gave
it as his opinion that it was simply a case of nerve strain. With
perfect rest and quiet, the lad might be almost restored by the
next day, but, if excited, there was a chance of brain fever. It
would be advisable for some one to sit up all night with him.
Finally, having done all we could, we left him in the charge of
Marthe and her mother, and set out for the town. It was past our
usual hour of dining, and we were both famished. The first restaurant
we came to assuaged the pangs of hunger with an excellent omelette ,
and an equally excellent entrec te to follow.
And now for quarters for the night, said Poirot, when at length
caf noir had completed the meal. Shall we try our old friend,
the H tel des Bains?
We traced our steps there without more ado. Yes, Messieurs could be
accommodated with two good rooms overlooking the sea. Then Poirot
asked a question which surprised me.
Has an English lady, Miss Robinson, arrived?
Yes, monsieur. She is in the little salon .
Ah!
Poirot, I cried, keeping pace with him as he walked along the
corridor, who on earth is Miss Robinson?
Poirot beamed kindly on me.
It is that I have arranged you a marriage, Hastings.
But, I say
Bah! said Poirot, giving me a friendly push over the threshold
of the door. Do you think I wish to trumpet aloud in Merlinville
the name of Duveen?
It was indeed Cinderella who rose to greet us. I took her hands in
both of mine. My eyes said the rest.
Poirot cleared his throat.
Mes enfants , he said, for the moment we have no time for
sentiment. There is work ahead of us. Mademoiselle, were you able
to do what I asked you?
In response, Cinderella took from her bag an object wrapped up in
paper, and handed it silently to Poirot. The latter unwrapped it. I
gave a start for it was the aeroplane dagger which I understood
she had cast into the sea. Strange, how reluctant women always are
to destroy the most compromising of objects and documents!
Tr s bien, mon enfant , said Poirot. I am pleased with you. Go
now and rest yourself. Hastings here and I have work to do. You
shall see him tomorrow.
Where are you going? asked the girl, her eyes widening.
You shall hear all about it tomorrow.
Because wherever you re going, I m coming too.
But mademoiselle
I m coming too, I tell you.
Poirot realized that it was futile to argue further. He gave in.
Come then, mademoiselle. But it will not be amusing. In all
probability nothing will happen.
The girl made no reply.
Twenty minutes later we set forth. It was quite dark now, a close,
oppressive evening. Poirot led the way out of the town in the
direction of the Villa Genevi ve. But when he reached the Villa
Marguerite he paused.
I should like to assure myself that all goes well with Jack
Renauld. Come with me, Hastings. Mademoiselle will perhaps remain
outside. Madame Daubreuil might say something which would wound her.
We unlatched the gate, and walked up the path. As we went round
to the side of the house, I drew Poirot s attention to a window
on the first floor. Thrown sharply on the blind was the profile of
Marthe Daubreuil.
Ah! said Poirot. I figure to myself that that is the room where
we shall find Jack Renauld.
Madame Daubreuil opened the door to us. She explained that Jack was
much the same, but perhaps we would like to see for ourselves. She
led us upstairs and into the bedroom. Marthe Daubreuil was
embroidering by a table with a lamp on it. She put her finger to
her lips as we entered.
Jack Renauld was sleeping an uneasy fitful sleep, his head turning
from side to side, and his face still unduly flushed.
Is the doctor coming again? asked Poirot in a whisper.
Not unless we send. He is sleeping that is the great thing. Maman
made him a tisane.
She sat down again with her embroidery as we left the room. Madame
Daubreuil accompanied us down the stairs. Since I had learned of her
past history, I viewed this woman with increased interest. She stood
there with her eyes cast down, the same very faint enigmatical smile
that I remembered on her lips. And suddenly I felt afraid of her,
as one might feel afraid of a beautiful poisonous snake.
I hope we have not deranged you, madame, said Poirot politely as
she opened the door for us to pass out.
Not at all, monsieur.
By the way, said Poirot, as though struck by an afterthought,
M. Stonor has not been in Merlinville today, has he?
I could not at all fathom the point of this question which I well
knew to be meaningless as far as Poirot was concerned.
Madame Daubreuil replied quite composedly:
Not that I know of.
He has not had an interview with Mrs. Renauld?
How should I know that, monsieur?
True, said Poirot. I thought you might have seen him coming or
going, that is all. Good night, madame.
Why I began.
No whys , Hastings. There will be time for that later.
We rejoined Cinderella and made our way rapidly in the direction of
the Villa Genevi ve. Poirot looked over his shoulder once at the
lighted window and the profile of Marthe as she bent over her work.
He is being guarded at all events, he muttered.
Arrived at the Villa Genevi ve, Poirot took up his stand behind
some bushes to the left of the drive, where, whilst enjoying a
good view ourselves, we were completely hidden from sight. The
Villa itself was in total darkness, everybody was without doubt
in bed and asleep. We were almost immediately under the window of
Mrs. Renauld s bedroom, which window, I noticed, was open. It seemed
to me that it was upon this spot that Poirot s eyes were fixed.
What are we going to do? I whispered.
Watch.
But
I do not expect anything to happen for at least an hour, probably
two hours, but the
But his words were interrupted by a long thin drawn cry:
Help!
A light flashed up in the second floor room on the right hand side
of the house. The cry came from there. And even as we watched
there came a shadow on the blind as of two people struggling.
Mille tenerres! cried Poirot. She must have changed her room!
Dashing forward, he battered wildly on the front door. Then rushing
to the tree in the flower bed, he swarmed up it with the agility
of a cat. I followed him, as with a bound he sprang in through the
open window. Looking over my shoulder, I saw Dulcie reaching the
branch behind me.
Take care, I exclaimed.
Take care of your grandmother! retorted the girl. This is
child s play to me.
Poirot had rushed through the empty room and was pounding on the
door leading into the corridor.
Locked and bolted on the outside, he growled. And it will take
time to burst it open.
The cries for help were getting noticeably fainter. I saw despair
in Poirot s eyes. He and I together put our shoulders to the door.
Cinderella s voice, calm and dispassionate, came from the window:
You ll be too late, I guess I m the only one who can do anything.
Before I could move a hand to stop her, she appeared to leap upward
into space. I rushed and looked out. To my horror, I saw her hanging
by her hands from the roof, propelling herself along by jerks in
the direction of the lighted window.
Good heavens! She ll be killed, I cried.
You forget. She s a professional acrobat, Hastings. It was the
providence of the good God that made her insist on coming with us
tonight. I only pray that she may be in time. Ah!
A cry of absolute terror floated out on to the night as the girl
disappeared through the right hand window; then in Cinderella s
clear tones came the words:
No, you don t! I ve got you and my wrists are just like steel.
At the same moment the door of our prison was opened cautiously by
Fran oise. Poirot brushed her aside unceremoniously and rushed
down the passage to where the other maids were grouped round the
further door.
It s locked on the inside, monsieur.
There was the sound of a heavy fall within. After a moment or two
the key turned and the door swung slowly open. Cinderella, very pale,
beckoned us in.
She is safe? demanded Poirot.
Yes, I was just in time. She was exhausted.
Mrs. Renauld was half sitting, half lying on the bed. She was
gasping for breath.
Nearly strangled me, she murmured painfully. The girl picked up
something from the floor and handed it to Poirot. It was a rolled
up ladder of silk rope, very fine but quite strong.
A getaway, said Poirot. By the window, whilst we were battering
at the door. Where is the other?
The girl stood aside a little and pointed. On the ground lay a
figure wrapped in some dark material a fold of which hid the face.
Dead?
She nodded.
I think so.
Head must have struck the marble fender.
But who is it? I cried.
The murderer of M. Renauld, Hastings. And the would be murderer
of Madame Renauld.
Puzzled and uncomprehending, I knelt down, and lifting the fold of
cloth, looked into the dead beautiful face of Marthe Daubreuil!
28
Journey s End
I have confused memories of the further events of that night. Poirot
seemed deaf to my repeated questions. He was engaged in overwhelming
Fran oise with reproaches for not having told him of Mrs. Renauld s
change of sleeping quarters.
I caught him by the shoulder, determined to attract his attention,
and make myself heard.
But you must have known, I expostulated. You were taken up to
see her this afternoon.
Poirot deigned to attend to me for a brief moment.
She had been wheeled on a sofa into the middle room her boudoir,
he explained.
But, monsieur, cried Fran oise, Madame changed her room almost
immediately after the crime! The associations they were too
distressing!
Then why was I not told, vociferated Poirot, striking the
table, and working himself into a first class passion. I demand
you why was I not told? You are an old woman completely
imbecile! And L onie and Denise are no better. All of you are triple
idiots! Your stupidity has nearly caused the death of your mistress.
But for this courageous child
He broke off, and, darting across the room to where the girl was
bending over ministering to Mrs. Renauld, he embraced her with
Gallic fervour slightly to my annoyance.
I was aroused from my condition of mental fog by a sharp command
from Poirot to fetch the doctor immediately on Mrs. Renauld s
behalf. After that, I might summon the police. And he added, to
complete my dudgeon:
It will hardly be worth your while to return here. I shall be
too busy to attend to you, and of Mademoiselle here I make a
garde malad .
I retired with what dignity I could command. Having done my
errands, I returned to the hotel. I understood next to nothing of
what had occurred. The events of the night seemed fantastic and
impossible. Nobody would answer my questions. Nobody had seemed to
hear them. Angrily, I flung myself into bed, and slept the sleep
of the bewildered and utterly exhausted.
I awoke to find the sun pouring in through the open windows and
Poirot, neat and smiling, sitting beside the bed.
Enfin you wake! But it is that you are a famous sleeper,
Hastings! Do you know that it is nearly eleven o clock?
I groaned and put a hand to my head.
I must have been dreaming, I said. Do you know, I actually
dreamt that we found Marthe Daubreuil s body in Mrs. Renauld s room,
and that you declared her to have murdered Mr. Renauld?
You were not dreaming. All that is quite true.
But Bella Duveen killed Mr. Renauld?
Oh, no, Hastings, she did not! She said she did yes but that
was to save the man she loved from the guillotine.
What?
Remember Jack Renauld s story. They both arrived on the scene at
the same instant, and each took the other to be the perpetrator of
the crime. The girl stares at him in horror, and then with a cry
rushes away. But, when she hears that the crime has been brought
home to him, she cannot bear it, and comes forward to accuse herself
and save him from certain death.
Poirot leaned back in his chair, and brought the tips of his fingers
together in familiar style.
The case was not quite satisfactory to me, he observed
judicially. All along I was strongly under the impression that we
were dealing with a cold blooded and premeditated crime committed
by some one who had been contented very cleverly with using
M. Renauld s own plans for throwing the police off the track.
The great criminal as you may remember my remarking to you once
is always supremely simple.
I nodded.
Now, to support this theory, the criminal must have been
fully cognizant of Mr. Renauld s plans. That leads us to Madame
Renauld. But facts fail to support any theory of her guilt. Is
there any one else who might have known of them? Yes. From Marthe
Daubreuil s own lips we have the admission that she overheard
M. Renauld s quarrel with the tramp. If she could overhear that,
there is no reason why she should not have heard everything else,
especially if M. and Madame Renauld were imprudent enough to discuss
their plans sitting on the bench. Remember how easily you overheard
Marthe s conversation with Jack Renauld from that spot.
But what possible motive could Marthe have for murdering
Mr. Renauld? I argued.
What motive? Money! M. Renauld was a millionaire several times
over, and at his death or so she and Jack believed half that vast
fortune would pass to his son. Let us reconstruct the scene from
the standpoint of Marthe Daubreuil.
Marthe Daubreuil overhears what passes between Renauld and
his wife. So far he has been a nice little source of income to
the Daubreuil mother and daughter, but now he proposes to escape
from their toils. At first, possibly, her idea is to prevent that
escape. But a bolder idea takes its place, and one that fails to
horrify the daughter of Jeanne Beroldy! At present M. Renauld stands
inexorably in the way of her marriage with Jack. If the latter
defies his father, he will be a pauper which is not at all to the
mind of Mademoiselle Marthe. In fact, I doubt if she has ever cared
a straw for Jack Renauld. She can simulate emotion, but in reality
she is of the same cold, calculating type as her mother. I doubt,
too, whether she was really very sure of her hold over the boy s
affections. She had dazzled and captivated him, but separated
from her, as his father could so easily manage to separate him,
she might lose him. But with M. Renauld dead, and Jack the heir
to half his millions, the marriage can take place at once, and at a
stroke she will attain wealth not the beggarly thousands that have
been extracted from him so far. And her clever brain takes in the
simplicity of the thing. It is all so easy. M. Renauld is planning
all the circumstances of his death she has only to step in at the
right moment and turn the farce into a grim reality. And here comes
in the second point which led me infallibly to Marthe Daubreuil
the dagger! Jack Renauld had three souvenirs made. One he gave
to his mother, one to Bella Duveen; was it not highly probable that
he had given the third one to Marthe Daubreuil?
So then, to sum up, there were four points of note against Marthe
Daubreuil:
1 Marthe Daubreuil could have overheard M. Renauld s plans.
2 Marthe Daubreuil had a direct interest in causing M. Renauld s
death.
3 Marthe Daubreuil was the daughter of the notorious Madame
Beroldy who in my opinion was morally and virtually the murderess
of her husband, although it may have been Georges Conneau s hand
which struck the actual blow.
4 Marthe Daubreuil was the only person, besides Jack Renauld,
likely to have the third dagger in her possession.
Poirot paused and cleared his throat.
Of course, when I learned of the existence of the other girl,
Bella Duveen, I realized that it was quite possible that she might
have killed M. Renauld. The solution did not commend itself to me,
because, as I pointed out to you, Hastings, an expert, such as I am,
likes to meet a foeman worthy of his steel. Still one must take
crimes as one finds them, not as one would like them to be. It
did not seem very likely that Bella Duveen would be wandering
about carrying a souvenir paper knife in her hand, but of course
she might have had some idea all the time of revenging herself on
Jack Renauld. When she actually came forward and confessed to the
murder, it seemed that all was over. And yet I was not satisfied,
mon ami . I was not satisfied. . . .
I went over the case again minutely, and I came to the same
conclusion as before. If it was not Bella Duveen, the only other
person who could have committed the crime was Marthe Daubreuil. But
I had not one single proof against her!
And then you showed me that letter from Mademoiselle Dulcie, and
I saw a chance of settling the matter once for all. The original
dagger was stolen by Dulcie Duveen and thrown into the sea since,
as she thought, it belonged to her sister. But if, by any chance,
it was not her sister s, but the one given by Jack to Marthe
Daubreuil why then, Bella Duveen s dagger would be still intact! I
said no word to you, Hastings it was no time for romance but I
sought out Mademoiselle Dulcie, told her as much as I deemed needful,
and set her to search amongst the effects of her sister. Imagine
my elation, when she sought me out according to my instructions
as Miss Robinson with the precious souvenir in her possession!
In the meantime I had taken steps to force Mademoiselle Marthe into
the open. By my orders, Mrs. Renauld repulsed her son, and declared
her intention of making a will on the morrow which should cut him
off from ever enjoying even a portion of his father s fortune.
It was a desperate step, but a necessary one, and Madame Renauld
was fully prepared to take the risk though unfortunately she also
never thought of mentioning her change of room. I suppose she took it
for granted that I knew. All happened as I thought. Marthe Daubreuil
made a last bold bid for the Renauld millions and failed!
What absolutely bewilders me, I said, is how she ever got into
the house without our seeing her. It seems an absolute miracle. We
left her behind at the Villa Marguerite, we go straight to the
Villa Genevi ve and yet she is there before us!
Ah, but we did not leave her behind. She was out of the Villa
Marguerite by the back way whilst we were talking to her mother in
the hall. That is where, as the Americans say, she put it over
on Hercule Poirot!
But the shadow on the blind? We saw it from the road.
Eh bien , when we looked up, Madame Daubreuil had just had time
to run upstairs and take her place.
Madame Daubreuil?
Yes. One is old, and one is young, one dark, and one fair, but,
for the purpose of a silhouette on a blind, their profiles are
singularly alike. Even I did not suspect triple imbecile that I
was! I thought I had plenty of time before me that she would not
try to gain admission to the Villa until much later. She had brains,
that beautiful Mademoiselle Marthe.
And her object was to murder Mrs. Renauld?
Yes. The whole fortune would then pass to her son. But it
would have been suicide, mon ami ! On the floor by Marthe
Daubreuil s body, I found a pad and a little bottle of chloroform
and a hypodermic syringe containing a fatal dose of morphine. You
understand? The chloroform first then when the victim is unconscious
the prick of the needle. By the morning the smell of the chloroform
has quite disappeared, and the syringe lies where it has fallen
from Madame Renauld s hand. What would he say, the excellent
M. Hautet? Poor woman! What did I tell you? The shock of joy,
it was too much on top of the rest! Did I not say that I should
not be surprised if her brain became unhinged. Altogether a most
tragic case, the Renauld Case!
However, Hastings, things did not go quite as Mademoiselle Marthe
had planned. To begin with, Madame Renauld was awake and waiting for
her. There is a struggle. But Madame Renauld is terribly weak still.
There is a last chance for Marthe Daubreuil. The idea of suicide is
at an end, but if she can silence Madame Renauld with her strong
hands, make a getaway with her little silk ladder whilst we are
still battering on the inside of the further door, and be back at
the Villa Marguerite before we return there, it will be hard to
prove anything against her. But she was checkmated not by Hercule
Poirot but by la petite acrobate with her wrists of steel.
I mused over the whole story.
When did you first begin to suspect Marthe Daubreuil, Poirot? When
she told us she had overheard the quarrel in the garden?
Poirot smiled.
My friend, do you remember when we drove into Merlinville that first
day? And the beautiful girl we saw standing at the gate? You asked
me if I had not noticed a young goddess, and I replied to you that I
had seen only a girl with anxious eyes. That is how I have thought
of Marthe Daubreuil from the beginning. The girl with the anxious
eyes! Why was she anxious? Not on Jack Renauld s behalf, for she did
not know then that he had been in Merlinville the previous evening.
By the way, I exclaimed, how is Jack Renauld?
Much better. He is still at the Villa Marguerite. But Madame
Daubreuil has disappeared. The police are looking for her.
Was she in with her daughter, do you think?
We shall never know. Madame is a lady who can keep her secrets. And
I doubt very much if the police will ever find her.
Has Jack Renauld been told?
Not yet.
It will be a terrible shock to him.
Naturally. And yet, do you know, Hastings, I doubt if his heart was
ever seriously engaged. So far we have looked upon Bella Duveen as a
siren, and Marthe Daubreuil as the girl he really loved. But I think
that if we reversed the terms we should come nearer to the truth.
Marthe Daubreuil was very beautiful. She set herself to fascinate
Jack, and she succeeded, but remember his curious reluctance to
break with the other girl. And see how he was willing to go to the
guillotine rather than implicate her. I have a little idea that
when he learns the truth he will be horrified revolted, and his
false love will wither away.
What about Giraud?
He has a crise of the nerves, that one! He has been obliged to
return to Paris.
We both smiled.
Poirot proved a fairly true prophet. When at length the doctor
pronounced Jack Renauld strong enough to hear the truth, it was
Poirot who broke it to him. The shock was indeed terrific. Yet Jack
rallied better than I could have supposed possible. His mother s
devotion helped him to live through those difficult days. The mother
and son were inseparable now.
There was a further revelation to come. Poirot had acquainted
Mrs. Renauld with the fact that he knew her secret, and had
represented to her that Jack should not be left in ignorance of
his father s past.
To hide the truth, never does it avail, madame! Be brave and tell
him everything.
With a heavy heart Mrs. Renauld consented, and her son learned
that the father he had loved had been in actual fact a fugitive
from justice. A halting question was promptly answered by Poirot.
Reassure yourself, M. Jack. The world knows nothing. As far as
I can see, there is no obligation for me to take the police into
my confidence. Throughout the case I have acted, not for them,
but for your father. Justice overtook him at last, but no one need
ever know that he and Georges Conneau were one and the same.
There were, of course, various points in the case that remained
puzzling to the police, but Poirot explained things in so plausible
a fashion that all query about them was gradually stilled.
Shortly after we got back to London, I noticed a magnificent model of
a foxhound adorning Poirot s mantelpiece. In answer to my inquiring
glance, Poirot nodded.
Mais, oui! I got my 500 francs! Is he not a splendid fellow? I
call him Giraud!
A few days later Jack Renauld came to see us with a resolute
expression on his face.
M. Poirot, I ve come to say good bye. I m sailing for South America
almost immediately. My father had large interests over the continent,
and I mean to start a new life out there.
You go alone, M. Jack?
My mother comes with me and I shall keep Stonor on as my
secretary. He likes out of the way parts of the world.
No one else goes with you?
Jack flushed.
You mean ?
A girl who loves you very dearly who has been willing to lay down
her life for you.
How could I ask her? muttered the boy. After all that has
happened, could I go to her and oh, what sort of a lame story
could I tell?
Les femmes they have a wonderful genius for manufacturing
crutches for stories like that.
Yes, but I ve been such a damned fool!
So have all of us, at one time and another, observed Poirot
philosophically.
But Jack s face had hardened.
There s something else. I m my father s son. Would any one marry
me, knowing that?
You are your father s son, you say. Hastings here will tell you
that I believe in heredity
Well, then
Wait. I know a woman, a woman of courage and endurance, capable
of great love, of supreme self sacrifice
The boy looked up. His eyes softened.
My mother!
Yes. You are your mother s son as well as your father s. Go then
to Mademoiselle Bella. Tell her everything. Keep nothing back and
see what she will say!
Jack looked irresolute.
Go to her as a boy no longer, but a man a man bowed by the fate of
the Past, and the fate of Today, but looking forward to a new and
wonderful life. Ask her to share it with you. You may not realize
it, but your love for each other has been tested in the fire and
not found wanting. You have both been willing to lay down your
lives for each other.
And what of Captain Arthur Hastings, humble chronicler of these
pages?
There is some talk of his joining the Renaulds on a ranch across
the seas, but for the end of this story I prefer to go back to a
morning in the garden of the Villa Genevi ve.
I can t call you Bella, I said, since it isn t your name. And
Dulcie seems so unfamiliar. So it s got to be Cinderella. Cinderella
married the Prince, you remember. I m not a Prince, but
She interrupted me.
Cinderella warned him, I m sure! You see, she couldn t promise to
turn into a princess. She was only a little scullion after all
It s the Prince s turn to interrupt, I interpolated. Do you
know what he said?
No?
Hell! said the Prince and kissed her!
And I suited the action to the word.
Ritz!
A hundred pounds instead of fifty!
I ll read it:
DEAR SIR,
Re your advertisement, I should be glad if you would call round
somewhere about lunch time.
Yours truly,
JULIUS P. HERSHEIMMER.
Ha! said Tommy. Do I smell a Boche? Or only an American millionaire
of unfortunate ancestry? At all events we ll call at lunch time. It s a
good time frequently leads to free food for two.
Tuppence nodded assent.
Now for Carter. We ll have to hurry.
Carshalton Terrace proved to be an unimpeachable row of what Tuppence
called ladylike looking houses. They rang the bell at No. 27, and a
neat maid answered the door. She looked so respectable that Tuppence s
heart sank. Upon Tommy s request for Mr. Carter, she showed them into
a small study on the ground floor where she left them. Hardly a minute
elapsed, however, before the door opened, and a tall man with a lean
hawklike face and a tired manner entered the room.
Mr. Y. A.? he said, and smiled. His smile was distinctly attractive.
Do sit down, both of you.
They obeyed. He himself took a chair opposite to Tuppence and smiled at
her encouragingly. There was something in the quality of his smile that
made the girl s usual readiness desert her.
As he did not seem inclined to open the conversation, Tuppence was
forced to begin.
We wanted to know that is, would you be so kind as to tell us anything
you know about Jane Finn?
Jane Finn? Ah! Mr. Carter appeared to reflect. Well, the question is,
what do you know about her?
Tuppence drew herself up.
I don t see that that s got anything to do with it.
No? But it has, you know, really it has. He smiled again in his tired
way, and continued reflectively. So that brings us down to it again.
What do you know about Jane Finn?
Come now, he continued, as Tuppence remained silent. You must know
something to have advertised as you did? He leaned forward a little,
his weary voice held a hint of persuasiveness. Suppose you tell me....
There was something very magnetic about Mr. Carter s personality.
Tuppence seemed to shake herself free of it with an effort, as she said:
We couldn t do that, could we, Tommy?
But to her surprise, her companion did not back her up. His eyes were
fixed on Mr. Carter, and his tone when he spoke held an unusual note of
deference.
I dare say the little we know won t be any good to you, sir. But such
as it is, you re welcome to it.
Tommy! cried out Tuppence in surprise.
Mr. Carter slewed round in his chair. His eyes asked a question.
Tommy nodded.
Yes, sir, I recognized you at once. Saw you in France when I was with
the Intelligence. As soon as you came into the room, I knew
Mr. Carter held up his hand.
No names, please. I m known as Mr. Carter here. It s my cousin s house,
by the way. She s willing to lend it to me sometimes when it s a case of
working on strictly unofficial lines. Well, now he looked from one to
the other who s going to tell me the story?
Fire ahead, Tuppence, directed Tommy. It s your yarn.
Yes, little lady, out with it.
And obediently Tuppence did out with it, telling the whole story from
the forming of the Young Adventurers, Ltd., downwards.
Mr. Carter listened in silence with a resumption of his tired manner.
Now and then he passed his hand across his lips as though to hide a
smile. When she had finished he nodded gravely.
Not much. But suggestive. Quite suggestive. If you ll excuse my saying
so, you re a curious young couple. I don t know you might succeed where
others have failed ... I believe in luck, you know always have....
He paused a moment, and then went on.
Well, how about it? You re out for adventure. How would you like
to work for me? All quite unofficial, you know. Expenses paid, and a
moderate screw?
Tuppence gazed at him, her lips parted, her eyes growing wider and
wider.
What should we have to do? she breathed.
Mr. Carter smiled.
Just go on with what you re doing now. Find Jane Finn .
Yes, but who is Jane Finn?
Mr. Carter nodded gravely.
Yes, you re entitled to know that, I think.
He leaned back in his chair, crossed his legs, brought the tips of his
fingers together, and began in a low monotone:
Secret diplomacy which, by the way, is nearly always bad policy! does
not concern you. It will be sufficient to say that in the early days of
1915 a certain document came into being. It was the draft of a secret
agreement treaty call it what you like. It was drawn up ready for
signature by the various representatives, and drawn up in America at
that time a neutral country. It was dispatched to England by a special
messenger selected for that purpose, a young fellow called Danvers. It
was hoped that the whole affair had been kept so secret that nothing
would have leaked out. That kind of hope is usually disappointed.
Somebody always talks!
Danvers sailed for England on the Lusitania . He carried the precious
papers in an oilskin packet which he wore next his skin. It was on that
particular voyage that the Lusitania was torpedoed and sunk. Danvers
was among the list of those missing. Eventually his body was washed
ashore, and identified beyond any possible doubt. But the oilskin packet
was missing!
The question was, had it been taken from him, or had he himself
passed it on into another s keeping? There were a few incidents that
strengthened the possibility of the latter theory. After the torpedo
struck the ship, in the few moments during the launching of the boats,
Danvers was seen speaking to a young American girl. No one actually
saw him pass anything to her, but he might have done so. It seems to me
quite likely that he entrusted the papers to this girl, believing that
she, as a woman, had a greater chance of bringing them safely to shore.
But if so, where was the girl, and what had she done with the papers?
By later advice from America it seemed likely that Danvers had been
closely shadowed on the way over. Was this girl in league with his
enemies? Or had she, in her turn, been shadowed and either tricked or
forced into handing over the precious packet?
We set to work to trace her out. It proved unexpectedly difficult.
Her name was Jane Finn, and it duly appeared among the list of the
survivors, but the girl herself seemed to have vanished completely.
Inquiries into her antecedents did little to help us. She was an orphan,
and had been what we should call over here a pupil teacher in a small
school out West. Her passport had been made out for Paris, where she
was going to join the staff of a hospital. She had offered her services
voluntarily, and after some correspondence they had been accepted.
Having seen her name in the list of the saved from the Lusitania , the
staff of the hospital were naturally very surprised at her not arriving
to take up her billet, and at not hearing from her in any way.
Well, every effort was made to trace the young lady but all in vain.
We tracked her across Ireland, but nothing could be heard of her after
she set foot in England. No use was made of the draft treaty as might
very easily have been done and we therefore came to the conclusion that
Danvers had, after all, destroyed it. The war entered on another phase,
the diplomatic aspect changed accordingly, and the treaty was never
redrafted. Rumours as to its existence were emphatically denied. The
disappearance of Jane Finn was forgotten and the whole affair was lost
in oblivion.
Mr. Carter paused, and Tuppence broke in impatiently:
But why has it all cropped up again? The war s over.
A hint of alertness came into Mr. Carter s manner.
Because it seems that the papers were not destroyed after all, and that
they might be resurrected to day with a new and deadly significance.
Tuppence stared. Mr. Carter nodded.
Yes, five years ago, that draft treaty was a weapon in our hands;
to day it is a weapon against us. It was a gigantic blunder. If its
terms were made public, it would mean disaster.... It might possibly
bring about another war not with Germany this time! That is an extreme
possibility, and I do not believe in its likelihood myself, but that
document undoubtedly implicates a number of our statesmen whom we cannot
afford to have discredited in any way at the present moment. As a party
cry for Labour it would be irresistible, and a Labour Government at this
juncture would, in my opinion, be a grave disability for British trade,
but that is a mere nothing to the real danger.
He paused, and then said quietly:
You may perhaps have heard or read that there is Bolshevist influence
at work behind the present Labour unrest?
Tuppence nodded.
That is the truth. Bolshevist gold is pouring into this country for the
specific purpose of procuring a Revolution. And there is a certain man,
a man whose real name is unknown to us, who is working in the dark for
his own ends. The Bolshevists are behind the Labour unrest but this
man is behind the Bolshevists . Who is he? We do not know. He is always
spoken of by the unassuming title of Mr. Brown. But one thing is
certain, he is the master criminal of this age. He controls a marvellous
organization. Most of the Peace propaganda during the war was originated
and financed by him. His spies are everywhere.
A naturalized German? asked Tommy.
On the contrary, I have every reason to believe he is an Englishman. He
was pro German, as he would have been pro Boer. What he seeks to attain
we do not know probably supreme power for himself, of a kind unique in
history. We have no clue as to his real personality. It is reported that
even his own followers are ignorant of it. Where we have come across his
tracks, he has always played a secondary part. Somebody else assumes
the chief r le. But afterwards we always find that there has been some
nonentity, a servant or a clerk, who has remained in the background
unnoticed, and that the elusive Mr. Brown has escaped us once more.
Oh! Tuppence jumped. I wonder
Yes?
I remember in Mr. Whittington s office. The clerk he called him Brown.
You don t think
Carter nodded thoughtfully.
Very likely. A curious point is that the name is usually mentioned. An
idiosyncrasy of genius. Can you describe him at all?
I really didn t notice. He was quite ordinary just like anyone else.
Mr. Carter sighed in his tired manner.
That is the invariable description of Mr. Brown! Brought a telephone
message to the man Whittington, did he? Notice a telephone in the outer
office?
Tuppence thought.
No, I don t think I did.
Exactly. That message was Mr. Brown s way of giving an order to his
subordinate. He overheard the whole conversation of course. Was it after
that that Whittington handed you over the money, and told you to come
the following day?
Tuppence nodded.
Yes, undoubtedly the hand of Mr. Brown! Mr. Carter paused. Well,
there it is, you see what you are pitting yourselves against? Possibly
the finest criminal brain of the age. I don t quite like it, you know.
You re such young things, both of you. I shouldn t like anything to
happen to you.
It won t, Tuppence assured him positively.
I ll look after her, sir, said Tommy.
And I ll look after you , retorted Tuppence, resenting the manly
assertion.
Well, then, look after each other, said Mr. Carter, smiling. Now
let s get back to business. There s something mysterious about this
draft treaty that we haven t fathomed yet. We ve been threatened with
it in plain and unmistakable terms. The Revolutionary element as good
as declare that it s in their hands, and that they intend to produce it
at a given moment. On the other hand, they are clearly at fault about
many of its provisions. The Government consider it as mere bluff
on their part, and, rightly or wrongly, have stuck to the policy of
absolute denial. I m not so sure. There have been hints, indiscreet
allusions, that seem to indicate that the menace is a real one. The
position is much as though they had got hold of an incriminating
document, but couldn t read it because it was in cipher but we know
that the draft treaty wasn t in cipher couldn t be in the nature of
things so that won t wash. But there s something . Of course, Jane
Finn may be dead for all we know but I don t think so. The curious
thing is that they re trying to get information about the girl from
us .
What?
Yes. One or two little things have cropped up. And your story, little
lady, confirms my idea. They know we re looking for Jane Finn. Well,
they ll produce a Jane Finn of their own say at a pensionnat in
Paris. Tuppence gasped, and Mr. Carter smiled. No one knows in the
least what she looks like, so that s all right. She s primed with a
trumped up tale, and her real business is to get as much information as
possible out of us. See the idea?
Then you think Tuppence paused to grasp the supposition fully that
it was as Jane Finn that they wanted me to go to Paris?
Mr. Carter smiled more wearily than ever.
I believe in coincidences, you know, he said.
CHAPTER V. MR. JULIUS P. HERSHEIMMER
WELL, said Tuppence, recovering herself, it really seems as though it
were meant to be.
Carter nodded.
I know what you mean. I m superstitious myself. Luck, and all that sort
of thing. Fate seems to have chosen you out to be mixed up in this.
Tommy indulged in a chuckle.
My word! I don t wonder Whittington got the wind up when Tuppence
plumped out that name! I should have myself. But look here, sir, we re
taking up an awful lot of your time. Have you any tips to give us before
we clear out?
I think not. My experts, working in stereotyped ways, have failed.
You will bring imagination and an open mind to the task. Don t be
discouraged if that too does not succeed. For one thing there is a
likelihood of the pace being forced.
Tuppence frowned uncomprehendingly.
When you had that interview with Whittington, they had time before
them. I have information that the big coup was planned for early in
the new year. But the Government is contemplating legislative action
which will deal effectually with the strike menace. They ll get wind of
it soon, if they haven t already, and it s possible that that may bring
things to a head. I hope it will myself. The less time they have to
mature their plans the better. I m just warning you that you haven t
much time before you, and that you needn t be cast down if you fail.
It s not an easy proposition anyway. That s all.
Tuppence rose.
I think we ought to be businesslike. What exactly can we count upon you
for, Mr. Carter? Mr. Carter s lips twitched slightly, but he replied
succinctly: Funds within reason, detailed information on any point,
and no official recognition . I mean that if you get yourselves into
trouble with the police, I can t officially help you out of it. You re
on your own.
Tuppence nodded sagely.
I quite understand that. I ll write out a list of the things I want to
know when I ve had time to think. Now about money
Yes, Miss Tuppence. Do you want to say how much?
Not exactly. We ve got plenty to go with for the present, but when we
want more
It will be waiting for you.
Yes, but I m sure I don t want to be rude about the Government if
you ve got anything to do with it, but you know one really has the devil
of a time getting anything out of it! And if we have to fill up a blue
form and send it in, and then, after three months, they send us a green
one, and so on well, that won t be much use, will it?
Mr. Carter laughed outright.
Don t worry, Miss Tuppence. You will send a personal demand to me here,
and the money, in notes, shall be sent by return of post. As to salary,
shall we say at the rate of three hundred a year? And an equal sum for
Mr. Beresford, of course.
Tuppence beamed upon him.
How lovely. You are kind. I do love money! I ll keep beautiful accounts
of our expenses all debit and credit, and the balance on the right side,
and red line drawn sideways with the totals the same at the bottom. I
really know how to do it when I think.
I m sure you do. Well, good bye, and good luck to you both.
He shook hands with them, and in another minute they were descending the
steps of 27 Carshalton Terrace with their heads in a whirl.
Tommy! Tell me at once, who is Mr. Carter ?
Tommy murmured a name in her ear.
Oh! said Tuppence, impressed.
And I can tell you, old bean, he s IT!
Oh! said Tuppence again. Then she added reflectively,
I like him, don t you? He looks so awfully tired and bored, and yet you
feel that underneath he s just like steel, all keen and flashing. Oh!
She gave a skip. Pinch me, Tommy, do pinch me. I can t believe it s
real!
Mr. Beresford obliged.
Ow! That s enough! Yes, we re not dreaming. We ve got a job!
And what a job! The joint venture has really begun.
It s more respectable than I thought it would be, said Tuppence
thoughtfully.
Luckily I haven t got your craving for crime! What time is it? Let s
have lunch oh!
The same thought sprang to the minds of each. Tommy voiced it first.
Julius P. Hersheimmer!
We never told Mr. Carter about hearing from him.
Well, there wasn t much to tell not till we ve seen him. Come on, we d
better take a taxi.
Now who s being extravagant?
All expenses paid, remember. Hop in.
At any rate, we shall make a better effect arriving this way, said
Tuppence, leaning back luxuriously. I m sure blackmailers never arrive
in buses!
We ve ceased being blackmailers, Tommy pointed out.
I m not sure I have, said Tuppence darkly.
On inquiring for Mr. Hersheimmer, they were at once taken up to his
suite. An impatient voice cried Come in in answer to the page boy s
knock, and the lad stood aside to let them pass in.
Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer was a great deal younger than either Tommy or
Tuppence had pictured him. The girl put him down as thirty five. He
was of middle height, and squarely built to match his jaw. His face was
pugnacious but pleasant. No one could have mistaken him for anything but
an American, though he spoke with very little accent.
Get my note? Sit down and tell me right away all you know about my
cousin.
Your cousin?
Sure thing. Jane Finn.
Is she your cousin?
My father and her mother were brother and sister, explained Mr.
Hersheimmer meticulously.
Oh! cried Tuppence. Then you know where she is?
No! Mr. Hersheimmer brought down his fist with a bang on the table.
I m darned if I do! Don t you?
We advertised to receive information, not to give it, said Tuppence
severely.
I guess I know that. I can read. But I thought maybe it was her back
history you were after, and that you d know where she was now?
Well, we wouldn t mind hearing her back history, said Tuppence
guardedly.
But Mr. Hersheimmer seemed to grow suddenly suspicious.
See here, he declared. This isn t Sicily! No demanding ransom or
threatening to crop her ears if I refuse. These are the British Isles,
so quit the funny business, or I ll just sing out for that beautiful big
British policeman I see out there in Piccadilly.
Tommy hastened to explain.
We haven t kidnapped your cousin. On the contrary, we re trying to find
her. We re employed to do so.
Mr. Hersheimmer leant back in his chair.
Put me wise, he said succinctly.
Tommy fell in with this demand in so far as he gave him a guarded
version of the disappearance of Jane Finn, and of the possibility of her
having been mixed up unawares in some political show. He alluded to
Tuppence and himself as private inquiry agents commissioned to find
her, and added that they would therefore be glad of any details Mr.
Hersheimmer could give them.
That gentleman nodded approval.
I guess that s all right. I was just a mite hasty. But London gets my
goat! I only know little old New York. Just trot out your questions and
I ll answer.
For the moment this paralysed the Young Adventurers, but Tuppence,
recovering herself, plunged boldly into the breach with a reminiscence
culled from detective fiction.
When did you last see the dece your cousin, I mean?
Never seen her, responded Mr. Hersheimmer.
What? demanded Tommy, astonished.
Hersheimmer turned to him.
No, sir. As I said before, my father and her mother were brother and
sister, just as you might be Tommy did not correct this view of their
relationship but they didn t always get on together. And when my aunt
made up her mind to marry Amos Finn, who was a poor school teacher out
West, my father was just mad! Said if he made his pile, as he seemed
in a fair way to do, she d never see a cent of it. Well, the upshot was
that Aunt Jane went out West and we never heard from her again.
The old man did pile it up. He went into oil, and he went into steel,
and he played a bit with railroads, and I can tell you he made Wall
Street sit up! He paused. Then he died last fall and I got the
dollars. Well, would you believe it, my conscience got busy! Kept
knocking me up and saying: What about your Aunt Jane, way out West? It
worried me some. You see, I figured it out that Amos Finn would never
make good. He wasn t the sort. End of it was, I hired a man to hunt her
down. Result, she was dead, and Amos Finn was dead, but they d left a
daughter Jane who d been torpedoed in the Lusitania on her way to
Paris. She was saved all right, but they didn t seem able to hear of her
over this side. I guessed they weren t hustling any, so I thought I d
come along over, and speed things up. I phoned Scotland Yard and the
Admiralty first thing. The Admiralty rather choked me off, but Scotland
Yard were very civil said they would make inquiries, even sent a man
round this morning to get her photograph. I m off to Paris to morrow,
just to see what the Prefecture is doing. I guess if I go to and fro
hustling them, they ought to get busy!
The energy of Mr. Hersheimmer was tremendous. They bowed before it.
But say now, he ended, you re not after her for anything? Contempt of
court, or something British? A proud spirited young American girl might
find your rules and regulations in war time rather irksome, and get up
against it. If that s the case, and there s such a thing as graft in
this country, I ll buy her off.
Tuppence reassured him.
That s good. Then we can work together. What about some lunch? Shall we
have it up here, or go down to the restaurant?
Tuppence expressed a preference for the latter, and Julius bowed to her
decision.
Oysters had just given place to Sole Colbert when a card was brought to
Hersheimmer.
Inspector Japp, C.I.D. Scotland Yard again. Another man this time. What
does he expect I can tell him that I didn t tell the first chap? I hope
they haven t lost that photograph. That Western photographer s place was
burned down and all his negatives destroyed this is the only copy in
existence. I got it from the principal of the college there.
An unformulated dread swept over Tuppence.
You you don t know the name of the man who came this morning?
Yes, I do. No, I don t. Half a second. It was on his card. Oh, I know!
Inspector Brown. Quiet, unassuming sort of chap.
CHAPTER VI. A PLAN OF CAMPAIGN
A veil might with profit be drawn over the events of the next half hour.
Suffice it to say that no such person as Inspector Brown was known to
Scotland Yard. The photograph of Jane Finn, which would have been of
the utmost value to the police in tracing her, was lost beyond recovery.
Once again Mr. Brown had triumphed.
The immediate result of this set back was to effect a rapprochement
between Julius Hersheimmer and the Young Adventurers. All barriers went
down with a crash, and Tommy and Tuppence felt they had known the young
American all their lives. They abandoned the discreet reticence of
private inquiry agents, and revealed to him the whole history of
the joint venture, whereat the young man declared himself tickled to
death.
He turned to Tuppence at the close of the narration.
I ve always had a kind of idea that English girls were just a mite
moss grown. Old fashioned and sweet, you know, but scared to move round
without a footman or a maiden aunt. I guess I m a bit behind the times!
The upshot of these confidential relations was that Tommy and Tuppence
took up their abode forthwith at the Ritz , in order, as Tuppence put
it, to keep in touch with Jane Finn s only living relation. And put
like that, she added confidentially to Tommy, nobody could boggle at
the expense!
Nobody did, which was the great thing.
And now, said the young lady on the morning after their installation,
to work!
Mr. Beresford put down the Daily Mail , which he was reading, and
applauded with somewhat unnecessary vigour. He was politely requested by
his colleague not to be an ass.
Dash it all, Tommy, we ve got to do something for our money.
Tommy sighed.
Yes, I fear even the dear old Government will not support us at the
Ritz in idleness for ever.
Therefore, as I said before, we must do something.
Well, said Tommy, picking up the Daily Mail again, do it. I
shan t stop you.
You see, continued Tuppence. I ve been thinking
She was interrupted by a fresh bout of applause.
It s all very well for you to sit there being funny, Tommy. It would do
you no harm to do a little brain work too.
My union, Tuppence, my union! It does not permit me to work before 11
a.m.
Tommy, do you want something thrown at you? It is absolutely essential
that we should without delay map out a plan of campaign.
Hear, hear!
Well, let s do it.
Tommy laid his paper finally aside. There s something of the simplicity
of the truly great mind about you, Tuppence. Fire ahead. I m listening.
To begin with, said Tuppence, what have we to go upon?
Absolutely nothing, said Tommy cheerily.
Wrong! Tuppence wagged an energetic finger. We have two distinct
clues.
What are they?
First clue, we know one of the gang.
Whittington?
Yes. I d recognize him anywhere.
Hum, said Tommy doubtfully, I don t call that much of a clue. You
don t know where to look for him, and it s about a thousand to one
against your running against him by accident.
I m not so sure about that, replied Tuppence thoughtfully. I ve often
noticed that once coincidences start happening they go on happening in
the most extraordinary way. I dare say it s some natural law that we
haven t found out. Still, as you say, we can t rely on that. But there
are places in London where simply every one is bound to turn up sooner
or later. Piccadilly Circus, for instance. One of my ideas was to take
up my stand there every day with a tray of flags.
What about meals? inquired the practical Tommy.
How like a man! What does mere food matter?
That s all very well. You ve just had a thundering good breakfast. No
one s got a better appetite than you have, Tuppence, and by tea time
you d be eating the flags, pins and all. But, honestly, I don t think
much of the idea. Whittington mayn t be in London at all.
That s true. Anyway, I think clue No. 2 is more promising.
Let s hear it.
It s nothing much. Only a Christian name Rita. Whittington mentioned
it that day.
Are you proposing a third advertisement: Wanted, female crook,
answering to the name of Rita?
I am not. I propose to reason in a logical manner. That man, Danvers,
was shadowed on the way over, wasn t he? And it s more likely to have
been a woman than a man
I don t see that at all.
I am absolutely certain that it would be a woman, and a good looking
one, replied Tuppence calmly.
On these technical points I bow to your decision, murmured Mr.
Beresford.
Now, obviously this woman, whoever she was, was saved.
How do you make that out?
If she wasn t, how would they have known Jane Finn had got the papers?
Correct. Proceed, O Sherlock!
Now there s just a chance, I admit it s only a chance, that this woman
may have been Rita.
And if so?
If so, we ve got to hunt through the survivors of the Lusitania till
we find her.
Then the first thing is to get a list of the survivors.
I ve got it. I wrote a long list of things I wanted to know, and sent
it to Mr. Carter. I got his reply this morning, and among other things
it encloses the official statement of those saved from the Lusitania .
How s that for clever little Tuppence?
Full marks for industry, zero for modesty. But the great point is, is
there a Rita on the list?
That s just what I don t know, confessed Tuppence.
Don t know?
Yes. Look here. Together they bent over the list. You see, very few
Christian names are given. They re nearly all Mrs. or Miss.
Tommy nodded.
That complicates matters, he murmured thoughtfully.
Tuppence gave her characteristic terrier shake.
Well, we ve just got to get down to it, that s all. We ll start with
the London area. Just note down the addresses of any of the females who
live in London or roundabout, while I put on my hat.
Five minutes later the young couple emerged into Piccadilly, and a few
seconds later a taxi was bearing them to The Laurels, Glendower Road,
N.7, the residence of Mrs. Edgar Keith, whose name figured first in a
list of seven reposing in Tommy s pocket book.
The Laurels was a dilapidated house, standing back from the road with
a few grimy bushes to support the fiction of a front garden. Tommy paid
off the taxi, and accompanied Tuppence to the front door bell. As she
was about to ring it, he arrested her hand.
What are you going to say?
What am I going to say? Why, I shall say Oh dear, I don t know. It s
very awkward.
I thought as much, said Tommy with satisfaction. How like a woman! No
foresight! Now just stand aside, and see how easily the mere male
deals with the situation. He pressed the bell. Tuppence withdrew to a
suitable spot.
A slatternly looking servant, with an extremely dirty face and a pair of
eyes that did not match, answered the door.
Tommy had produced a notebook and pencil.
Good morning, he said briskly and cheerfully. From the Hampstead
Borough Council. The new Voting Register. Mrs. Edgar Keith lives here,
does she not?
Yaas, said the servant.
Christian name? asked Tommy, his pencil poised.
Missus s? Eleanor Jane.
Eleanor, spelt Tommy. Any sons or daughters over twenty one?
Naow.
Thank you. Tommy closed the notebook with a brisk snap. Good
morning.
The servant volunteered her first remark:
I thought perhaps as you d come about the gas, she observed
cryptically, and shut the door.
Tommy rejoined his accomplice.
You see, Tuppence, he observed. Child s play to the masculine mind.
I don t mind admitting that for once you ve scored handsomely. I should
never have thought of that.
Good wheeze, wasn t it? And we can repeat it ad lib .
Lunch time found the young couple attacking a steak and chips in an
obscure hostelry with avidity. They had collected a Gladys Mary and a
Marjorie, been baffled by one change of address, and had been forced to
listen to a long lecture on universal suffrage from a vivacious American
lady whose Christian name had proved to be Sadie.
Ah! said Tommy, imbibing a long draught of beer, I feel better.
Where s the next draw?
The notebook lay on the table between them. Tuppence picked it up.
Mrs. Vandemeyer, she read, 20 South Audley Mansions. Miss Wheeler, 43
Clapington Road, Battersea. She s a lady s maid, as far as I remember,
so probably won t be there, and, anyway, she s not likely.
Then the Mayfair lady is clearly indicated as the first port of call.
Tommy, I m getting discouraged.
Buck up, old bean. We always knew it was an outside chance. And,
anyway, we re only starting. If we draw a blank in London, there s a
fine tour of England, Ireland and Scotland before us.
True, said Tuppence, her flagging spirits reviving. And all expenses
paid! But, oh, Tommy, I do like things to happen quickly. So far,
adventure has succeeded adventure, but this morning has been dull as
dull.
You must stifle this longing for vulgar sensation, Tuppence. Remember
that if Mr. Brown is all he is reported to be, it s a wonder that he has
not ere now done us to death. That s a good sentence, quite a literary
flavour about it.
You re really more conceited than I am with less excuse! Ahem! But it
certainly is queer that Mr. Brown has not yet wreaked vengeance upon us.
You see, I can do it too. We pass on our way unscathed.
Perhaps he doesn t think us worth bothering about, suggested the young
man simply.
Tuppence received the remark with great disfavour.
How horrid you are, Tommy. Just as though we didn t count.
Sorry, Tuppence. What I meant was that we work like moles in the dark,
and that he has no suspicion of our nefarious schemes. Ha ha!
Ha ha! echoed Tuppence approvingly, as she rose.
South Audley Mansions was an imposing looking block of flats just off
Park Lane. No. 20 was on the second floor.
Tommy had by this time the glibness born of practice. He rattled off
the formula to the elderly woman, looking more like a housekeeper than a
servant, who opened the door to him.
Christian name?
Margaret.
Tommy spelt it, but the other interrupted him.
No, g u e .
Oh, Marguerite; French way, I see. He paused, then plunged boldly. We
had her down as Rita Vandemeyer, but I suppose that s incorrect?
She s mostly called that, sir, but Marguerite s her name.
Thank you. That s all. Good morning.
Hardly able to contain his excitement, Tommy hurried down the stairs.
Tuppence was waiting at the angle of the turn.
You heard?
Yes. Oh, Tommy!
Tommy squeezed her arm sympathetically.
I know, old thing. I feel the same.
It s it s so lovely to think of things and then for them really to
happen! cried Tuppence enthusiastically.
Her hand was still in Tommy s. They had reached the entrance hall. There
were footsteps on the stairs above them, and voices.
Suddenly, to Tommy s complete surprise, Tuppence dragged him into the
little space by the side of the lift where the shadow was deepest.
What the
Hush!
Two men came down the stairs and passed out through the entrance.
Tuppence s hand closed tighter on Tommy s arm.
Quick follow them. I daren t. He might recognize me. I don t know who
the other man is, but the bigger of the two was Whittington.
CHAPTER VII. THE HOUSE IN SOHO
WHITTINGTON and his companion were walking at a good pace. Tommy started
in pursuit at once, and was in time to see them turn the corner of the
street. His vigorous strides soon enabled him to gain upon them, and by
the time he, in his turn, reached the corner the distance between them
was sensibly lessened. The small Mayfair streets were comparatively
deserted, and he judged it wise to content himself with keeping them in
sight.
The sport was a new one to him. Though familiar with the technicalities
from a course of novel reading, he had never before attempted to
follow anyone, and it appeared to him at once that, in actual
practice, the proceeding was fraught with difficulties. Supposing, for
instance, that they should suddenly hail a taxi? In books, you simply
leapt into another, promised the driver a sovereign or its modern
equivalent and there you were. In actual fact, Tommy foresaw that it
was extremely likely there would be no second taxi. Therefore he
would have to run. What happened in actual fact to a young man who ran
incessantly and persistently through the London streets? In a main road
he might hope to create the illusion that he was merely running for a
bus. But in these obscure aristocratic byways he could not but feel that
an officious policeman might stop him to explain matters.
At this juncture in his thoughts a taxi with flag erect turned the
corner of the street ahead. Tommy held his breath. Would they hail it?
He drew a sigh of relief as they allowed it to pass unchallenged. Their
course was a zigzag one designed to bring them as quickly as possible
to Oxford Street. When at length they turned into it, proceeding in an
easterly direction, Tommy slightly increased his pace. Little by little
he gained upon them. On the crowded pavement there was little chance of
his attracting their notice, and he was anxious if possible to catch
a word or two of their conversation. In this he was completely
foiled; they spoke low and the din of the traffic drowned their voices
effectually.
Just before the Bond Street Tube station they crossed the road, Tommy,
unperceived, faithfully at their heels, and entered the big Lyons .
There they went up to the first floor, and sat at a small table in the
window. It was late, and the place was thinning out. Tommy took a seat
at the table next to them, sitting directly behind Whittington in case
of recognition. On the other hand, he had a full view of the second man
and studied him attentively. He was fair, with a weak, unpleasant face,
and Tommy put him down as being either a Russian or a Pole. He was
probably about fifty years of age, his shoulders cringed a little as he
talked, and his eyes, small and crafty, shifted unceasingly.
Having already lunched heartily, Tommy contented himself with ordering
a Welsh rarebit and a cup of coffee. Whittington ordered a substantial
lunch for himself and his companion; then, as the waitress withdrew, he
moved his chair a little closer to the table and began to talk earnestly
in a low voice. The other man joined in. Listen as he would, Tommy could
only catch a word here and there; but the gist of it seemed to be some
directions or orders which the big man was impressing on his companion,
and with which the latter seemed from time to time to disagree.
Whittington addressed the other as Boris.
Tommy caught the word Ireland several times, also propaganda, but
of Jane Finn there was no mention. Suddenly, in a lull in the clatter of
the room, he got one phrase entire. Whittington was speaking. Ah, but
you don t know Flossie. She s a marvel. An archbishop would swear she
was his own mother. She gets the voice right every time, and that s
really the principal thing.
Tommy did not hear Boris s reply, but in response to it Whittington said
something that sounded like: Of course only in an emergency....
Then he lost the thread again. But presently the phrases became distinct
again whether because the other two had insensibly raised their voices,
or because Tommy s ears were getting more attuned, he could not tell.
But two words certainly had a most stimulating effect upon the listener.
They were uttered by Boris and they were: Mr. Brown.
Whittington seemed to remonstrate with him, but he merely laughed.
Why not, my friend? It is a name most respectable most common. Did
he not choose it for that reason? Ah, I should like to meet him Mr.
Brown.
There was a steely ring in Whittington s voice as he replied:
Who knows? You may have met him already.
Bah! retorted the other. That is children s talk a fable for the
police. Do you know what I say to myself sometimes? That he is a fable
invented by the Inner Ring, a bogy to frighten us with. It might be so.
And it might not.
I wonder ... or is it indeed true that he is with us and amongst us,
unknown to all but a chosen few? If so, he keeps his secret well. And
the idea is a good one, yes. We never know. We look at each other
one of us is Mr. Brown which? He commands but also he serves. Among
us in the midst of us. And no one knows which he is....
With an effort the Russian shook off the vagary of his fancy. He looked
at his watch.
Yes, said Whittington. We might as well go.
He called the waitress and asked for his bill. Tommy did likewise, and a
few moments later was following the two men down the stairs.
Outside, Whittington hailed a taxi, and directed the driver to go to
Waterloo.
Taxis were plentiful here, and before Whittington s had driven off
another was drawing up to the curb in obedience to Tommy s peremptory
hand.
Follow that other taxi, directed the young man. Don t lose it.
The elderly chauffeur showed no interest. He merely grunted and jerked
down his flag. The drive was uneventful. Tommy s taxi came to rest at
the departure platform just after Whittington s. Tommy was behind him at
the booking office. He took a first class single ticket to Bournemouth,
Tommy did the same. As he emerged, Boris remarked, glancing up at the
clock: You are early. You have nearly half an hour.
Boris s words had aroused a new train of thought in Tommy s mind.
Clearly Whittington was making the journey alone, while the other
remained in London. Therefore he was left with a choice as to which he
would follow. Obviously, he could not follow both of them unless
Like Boris, he glanced up at the clock, and then to the announcement
board of the trains. The Bournemouth train left at 3.30. It was now ten
past. Whittington and Boris were walking up and down by the bookstall.
He gave one doubtful look at them, then hurried into an adjacent
telephone box. He dared not waste time in trying to get hold of
Tuppence. In all probability she was still in the neighbourhood of South
Audley Mansions. But there remained another ally. He rang up the Ritz
and asked for Julius Hersheimmer. There was a click and a buzz. Oh, if
only the young American was in his room! There was another click, and
then Hello in unmistakable accents came over the wire.
That you, Hersheimmer? Beresford speaking. I m at Waterloo. I ve
followed Whittington and another man here. No time to explain.
Whittington s off to Bournemouth by the 3.30. Can you get there by
then?
The reply was reassuring.
Sure. I ll hustle.
The telephone rang off. Tommy put back the receiver with a sigh of
relief. His opinion of Julius s power of hustling was high. He felt
instinctively that the American would arrive in time.
Whittington and Boris were still where he had left them. If Boris
remained to see his friend off, all was well. Then Tommy fingered his
pocket thoughtfully. In spite of the carte blanche assured to him, he
had not yet acquired the habit of going about with any considerable sum
of money on him. The taking of the first class ticket to Bournemouth
had left him with only a few shillings in his pocket. It was to be hoped
that Julius would arrive better provided.
In the meantime, the minutes were creeping by: 3.15, 3.20, 3.25, 3.27.
Supposing Julius did not get there in time. 3.29.... Doors were banging.
Tommy felt cold waves of despair pass over him. Then a hand fell on his
shoulder.
Here I am, son. Your British traffic beats description! Put me wise to
the crooks right away.
That s Whittington there, getting in now, that big dark man. The other
is the foreign chap he s talking to.
I m on to them. Which of the two is my bird?
Tommy had thought out this question.
Got any money with you?
Julius shook his head, and Tommy s face fell.
I guess I haven t more than three or four hundred dollars with me at
the moment, explained the American.
Tommy gave a faint whoop of relief.
Oh, Lord, you millionaires! You don t talk the same language! Climb
aboard the lugger. Here s your ticket. Whittington s your man.
Me for Whittington! said Julius darkly. The train was just starting
as he swung himself aboard. So long, Tommy. The train slid out of the
station.
Tommy drew a deep breath. The man Boris was coming along the platform
towards him. Tommy allowed him to pass and then took up the chase once
more.
From Waterloo Boris took the tube as far as Piccadilly Circus. Then he
walked up Shaftesbury Avenue, finally turning off into the maze of mean
streets round Soho. Tommy followed him at a judicious distance.
They reached at length a small dilapidated square. The houses there had
a sinister air in the midst of their dirt and decay. Boris looked round,
and Tommy drew back into the shelter of a friendly porch. The place was
almost deserted. It was a cul de sac, and consequently no traffic passed
that way. The stealthy way the other had looked round stimulated Tommy s
imagination. From the shelter of the doorway he watched him go up the
steps of a particularly evil looking house and rap sharply, with a
peculiar rhythm, on the door. It was opened promptly, he said a word or
two to the doorkeeper, then passed inside. The door was shut to again.
It was at this juncture that Tommy lost his head. What he ought to have
done, what any sane man would have done, was to remain patiently where
he was and wait for his man to come out again. What he did do was
entirely foreign to the sober common sense which was, as a rule, his
leading characteristic. Something, as he expressed it, seemed to snap in
his brain. Without a moment s pause for reflection he, too, went up the
steps, and reproduced as far as he was able the peculiar knock.
The door swung open with the same promptness as before. A
villainous faced man with close cropped hair stood in the doorway.
Well? he grunted.
It was at that moment that the full realization of his folly began to
come home to Tommy. But he dared not hesitate. He seized at the first
words that came into his mind.
Mr. Brown? he said.
To his surprise the man stood aside.
Upstairs, he said, jerking his thumb over his shoulder, second door
on your left.
CHAPTER VIII. THE ADVENTURES OF TOMMY
TAKEN aback though he was by the man s words, Tommy did not hesitate.
If audacity had successfully carried him so far, it was to be hoped
it would carry him yet farther. He quietly passed into the house and
mounted the ramshackle staircase. Everything in the house was filthy
beyond words. The grimy paper, of a pattern now indistinguishable,
hung in loose festoons from the wall. In every angle was a grey mass of
cobweb.
Tommy proceeded leisurely. By the time he reached the bend of the
staircase, he had heard the man below disappear into a back room.
Clearly no suspicion attached to him as yet. To come to the house and
ask for Mr. Brown appeared indeed to be a reasonable and natural
proceeding.
At the top of the stairs Tommy halted to consider his next move. In
front of him ran a narrow passage, with doors opening on either side of
it. From the one nearest him on the left came a low murmur of voices.
It was this room which he had been directed to enter. But what held
his glance fascinated was a small recess immediately on his right,
half concealed by a torn velvet curtain. It was directly opposite the
left handed door and, owing to its angle, it also commanded a good view
of the upper part of the staircase. As a hiding place for one or, at a
pinch, two men, it was ideal, being about two feet deep and three feet
wide. It attracted Tommy mightily. He thought things over in his usual
slow and steady way, deciding that the mention of Mr. Brown was not a
request for an individual, but in all probability a password used by
the gang. His lucky use of it had gained him admission. So far he had
aroused no suspicion. But he must decide quickly on his next step.
Suppose he were boldly to enter the room on the left of the passage.
Would the mere fact of his having been admitted to the house be
sufficient? Perhaps a further password would be required, or, at any
rate, some proof of identity. The doorkeeper clearly did not know all
the members of the gang by sight, but it might be different upstairs.
On the whole it seemed to him that luck had served him very well so far,
but that there was such a thing as trusting it too far. To enter
that room was a colossal risk. He could not hope to sustain his part
indefinitely; sooner or later he was almost bound to betray himself, and
then he would have thrown away a vital chance in mere foolhardiness.
A repetition of the signal knock sounded on the door below, and Tommy,
his mind made up, slipped quickly into the recess, and cautiously drew
the curtain farther across so that it shielded him completely from
sight. There were several rents and slits in the ancient material which
afforded him a good view. He would watch events, and any time he chose
could, after all, join the assembly, modelling his behaviour on that of
the new arrival.
The man who came up the staircase with a furtive, soft footed tread was
quite unknown to Tommy. He was obviously of the very dregs of society.
The low beetling brows, and the criminal jaw, the bestiality of the
whole countenance were new to the young man, though he was a type that
Scotland Yard would have recognized at a glance.
The man passed the recess, breathing heavily as he went. He stopped at
the door opposite, and gave a repetition of the signal knock. A voice
inside called out something, and the man opened the door and passed in,
affording Tommy a momentary glimpse of the room inside. He thought there
must be about four or five people seated round a long table that took up
most of the space, but his attention was caught and held by a tall man
with close cropped hair and a short, pointed, naval looking beard,
who sat at the head of the table with papers in front of him. As the
new comer entered he glanced up, and with a correct, but curiously
precise enunciation, which attracted Tommy s notice, he asked:
Your number, comrade?
Fourteen, gov nor, replied the other hoarsely.
Correct.
The door shut again.
If that isn t a Hun, I m a Dutchman! said Tommy to himself. And
running the show darned systematically too as they always do. Lucky I
didn t roll in. I d have given the wrong number, and there would have
been the deuce to pay. No, this is the place for me. Hullo, here s
another knock.
This visitor proved to be of an entirely different type to the last.
Tommy recognized in him an Irish Sinn Feiner. Certainly Mr. Brown s
organization was a far reaching concern. The common criminal, the
well bred Irish gentleman, the pale Russian, and the efficient German
master of the ceremonies! Truly a strange and sinister gathering! Who
was this man who held in his finger these curiously variegated links of
an unknown chain?
In this case, the procedure was exactly the same. The signal knock, the
demand for a number, and the reply Correct.
Two knocks followed in quick succession on the door below. The first man
was quite unknown to Tommy, who put him down as a city clerk. A quiet,
intelligent looking man, rather shabbily dressed. The second was of the
working classes, and his face was vaguely familiar to the young man.
Three minutes later came another, a man of commanding appearance,
exquisitely dressed, and evidently well born. His face, again, was not
unknown to the watcher, though he could not for the moment put a name to
it.
After his arrival there was a long wait. In fact Tommy concluded that
the gathering was now complete, and was just cautiously creeping out
from his hiding place, when another knock sent him scuttling back to
cover.
This last comer came up the stairs so quietly that he was almost abreast
of Tommy before the young man had realized his presence.
He was a small man, very pale, with a gentle almost womanish air. The
angle of the cheek bones hinted at his Slavonic ancestry, otherwise
there was nothing to indicate his nationality. As he passed the recess,
he turned his head slowly. The strange light eyes seemed to burn through
the curtain; Tommy could hardly believe that the man did not know he was
there and in spite of himself he shivered. He was no more fanciful than
the majority of young Englishmen, but he could not rid himself of the
impression that some unusually potent force emanated from the man. The
creature reminded him of a venomous snake.
A moment later his impression was proved correct. The new comer knocked
on the door as all had done, but his reception was very different. The
bearded man rose to his feet, and all the others followed suit. The
German came forward and shook hands. His heels clicked together.
We are honoured, he said. We are greatly honoured. I much feared that
it would be impossible.
The other answered in a low voice that had a kind of hiss in it:
There were difficulties. It will not be possible again, I fear. But one
meeting is essential to define my policy. I can do nothing without Mr.
Brown. He is here?
The change in the German s voice was audible as he replied with slight
hesitation:
We have received a message. It is impossible for him to be present
in person. He stopped, giving a curious impression of having left the
sentence unfinished.
A very slow smile overspread the face of the other. He looked round at a
circle of uneasy faces.
Ah! I understand. I have read of his methods. He works in the dark and
trusts no one. But, all the same, it is possible that he is among us
now.... He looked round him again, and again that expression of fear
swept over the group. Each man seemed eyeing his neighbour doubtfully.
The Russian tapped his cheek.
So be it. Let us proceed.
The German seemed to pull himself together. He indicated the place he
had been occupying at the head of the table. The Russian demurred, but
the other insisted.
It is the only possible place, he said, for Number One. Perhaps
Number Fourteen will shut the door?
In another moment Tommy was once more confronting bare wooden panels,
and the voices within had sunk once more to a mere undistinguishable
murmur. Tommy became restive. The conversation he had overheard had
stimulated his curiosity. He felt that, by hook or by crook, he must
hear more.
There was no sound from below, and it did not seem likely that the
doorkeeper would come upstairs. After listening intently for a minute or
two, he put his head round the curtain. The passage was deserted. Tommy
bent down and removed his shoes, then, leaving them behind the curtain,
he walked gingerly out on his stockinged feet, and kneeling down by
the closed door he laid his ear cautiously to the crack. To his intense
annoyance he could distinguish little more; just a chance word here and
there if a voice was raised, which merely served to whet his curiosity
still farther.
He eyed the handle of the door tentatively. Could he turn it by degrees
so gently and imperceptibly that those in the room would notice nothing?
He decided that with great care it could be done. Very slowly, a
fraction of an inch at a time, he moved it round, holding his breath in
his excessive care. A little more a little more still would it never
be finished? Ah! at last it would turn no farther.
He stayed so for a minute or two, then drew a deep breath, and pressed
it ever so slightly inward. The door did not budge. Tommy was annoyed.
If he had to use too much force, it would almost certainly creak.
He waited until the voices rose a little, then he tried again. Still
nothing happened. He increased the pressure. Had the beastly thing
stuck? Finally, in desperation, he pushed with all his might. But the
door remained firm, and at last the truth dawned upon him. It was locked
or bolted on the inside.
For a moment or two Tommy s indignation got the better of him.
Well, I m damned! he said. What a dirty trick!
As his indignation cooled, he prepared to face the situation. Clearly
the first thing to be done was to restore the handle to its original
position. If he let it go suddenly, the men inside would be almost
certain to notice it, so, with the same infinite pains, he reversed his
former tactics. All went well, and with a sigh of relief the young man
rose to his feet. There was a certain bulldog tenacity about Tommy that
made him slow to admit defeat. Checkmated for the moment, he was far
from abandoning the conflict. He still intended to hear what was going
on in the locked room. As one plan had failed, he must hunt about for
another.
He looked round him. A little farther along the passage on the left was
a second door. He slipped silently along to it. He listened for a moment
or two, then tried the handle. It yielded, and he slipped inside.
The room, which was untenanted, was furnished as a bedroom. Like
everything else in the house, the furniture was falling to pieces, and
the dirt was, if anything, more abundant.
But what interested Tommy was the thing he had hoped to find, a
communicating door between the two rooms, up on the left by the window.
Carefully closing the door into the passage behind him, he stepped
across to the other and examined it closely. The bolt was shot across
it. It was very rusty, and had clearly not been used for some time. By
gently wriggling it to and fro, Tommy managed to draw it back without
making too much noise. Then he repeated his former man uvres with the
handle this time with complete success. The door swung open a crack,
a mere fraction, but enough for Tommy to hear what went on. There was a
velvet porti re on the inside of this door which prevented him from
seeing, but he was able to recognize the voices with a reasonable amount
of accuracy.
The Sinn Feiner was speaking. His rich Irish voice was unmistakable:
That s all very well. But more money is essential. No money no
results!
Another voice which Tommy rather thought was that of Boris replied:
Will you guarantee that there are results?
In a month from now sooner or later as you wish I will guarantee you
such a reign of terror in Ireland as shall shake the British Empire to
its foundations.
There was a pause, and then came the soft, sibilant accents of Number
One:
Good! You shall have the money. Boris, you will see to that.
Boris asked a question:
Via the Irish Americans, and Mr. Potter as usual?
I guess that ll be all right! said a new voice, with a transatlantic
intonation, though I d like to point out, here and now, that things
are getting a mite difficult. There s not the sympathy there was, and
a growing disposition to let the Irish settle their own affairs without
interference from America.
Tommy felt that Boris had shrugged his shoulders as he answered:
Does that matter, since the money only nominally comes from the
States?
The chief difficulty is the landing of the ammunition, said the Sinn
Feiner. The money is conveyed in easily enough thanks to our colleague
here.
Another voice, which Tommy fancied was that of the tall,
commanding looking man whose face had seemed familiar to him, said:
Think of the feelings of Belfast if they could hear you!
That is settled, then, said the sibilant tones. Now, in the matter
of the loan to an English newspaper, you have arranged the details
satisfactorily, Boris?
I think so.
That is good. An official denial from Moscow will be forthcoming if
necessary.
There was a pause, and then the clear voice of the German broke the
silence:
I am directed by Mr. Brown, to place the summaries of the reports
from the different unions before you. That of the miners is most
satisfactory. We must hold back the railways. There may be trouble with
the A.S.E.
For a long time there was a silence, broken only by the rustle of papers
and an occasional word of explanation from the German. Then Tommy heard
the light tap tap of fingers, drumming on the table.
And the date, my friend? said Number One.
The 29th.
The Russian seemed to consider:
That is rather soon.
I know. But it was settled by the principal Labour leaders, and we
cannot seem to interfere too much. They must believe it to be entirely
their own show.
The Russian laughed softly, as though amused.
Yes, yes, he said. That is true. They must have no inkling that we
are using them for our own ends. They are honest men and that is their
value to us. It is curious but you cannot make a revolution without
honest men. The instinct of the populace is infallible. He paused, and
then repeated, as though the phrase pleased him: Every revolution has
had its honest men. They are soon disposed of afterwards.
There was a sinister note in his voice.
The German resumed:
Clymes must go. He is too far seeing. Number Fourteen will see to
that.
There was a hoarse murmur.
That s all right, gov nor. And then after a moment or two: Suppose
I m nabbed.
You will have the best legal talent to defend you, replied the
German quietly. But in any case you will wear gloves fitted with the
finger prints of a notorious housebreaker. You have little to fear.
Oh, I ain t afraid, gov nor. All for the good of the cause. The streets
is going to run with blood, so they say. He spoke with a grim relish.
Dreams of it, sometimes, I does. And diamonds and pearls rolling about
in the gutter for anyone to pick up!
Tommy heard a chair shifted. Then Number One spoke:
Then all is arranged. We are assured of success?
I think so. But the German spoke with less than his usual confidence.
Number One s voice held suddenly a dangerous quality:
What has gone wrong?
Nothing; but
But what?
The Labour leaders. Without them, as you say, we can do nothing. If
they do not declare a general strike on the 29th
Why should they not?
As you ve said, they re honest. And, in spite of everything we ve
done to discredit the Government in their eyes, I m not sure that they
haven t got a sneaking faith and belief in it.
But
I know. They abuse it unceasingly. But, on the whole, public opinion
swings to the side of the Government. They will not go against it.
Again the Russian s fingers drummed on the table.
To the point, my friend. I was given to understand that there was a
certain document in existence which assured success.
That is so. If that document were placed before the leaders, the result
would be immediate. They would publish it broadcast throughout England,
and declare for the revolution without a moment s hesitation. The
Government would be broken finally and completely.
Then what more do you want?
The document itself, said the German bluntly.
Ah! It is not in your possession? But you know where it is?
No.
Does anyone know where it is?
One person perhaps. And we are not sure of that even.
Who is this person?
A girl.
Tommy held his breath.
A girl? The Russian s voice rose contemptuously. And you have not
made her speak? In Russia we have ways of making a girl talk.
This case is different, said the German sullenly.
How different? He paused a moment, then went on: Where is the girl
now?
The girl?
Yes.
She is
But Tommy heard no more. A crashing blow descended on his head, and all
was darkness.
CHAPTER IX. TUPPENCE ENTERS DOMESTIC SERVICE
WHEN Tommy set forth on the trail of the two men, it took all Tuppence s
self command to refrain from accompanying him. However, she contained
herself as best she might, consoled by the reflection that her reasoning
had been justified by events. The two men had undoubtedly come from the
second floor flat, and that one slender thread of the name Rita had
set the Young Adventurers once more upon the track of the abductors of
Jane Finn.
The question was what to do next? Tuppence hated letting the grass grow
under her feet. Tommy was amply employed, and debarred from joining him
in the chase, the girl felt at a loose end. She retraced her steps
to the entrance hall of the mansions. It was now tenanted by a small
lift boy, who was polishing brass fittings, and whistling the latest air
with a good deal of vigour and a reasonable amount of accuracy.
He glanced round at Tuppence s entry. There was a certain amount of the
gamin element in the girl, at all events she invariably got on well
with small boys. A sympathetic bond seemed instantly to be formed. She
reflected that an ally in the enemy s camp, so to speak, was not to be
despised.
Well, William, she remarked cheerfully, in the best approved
hospital early morning style, getting a good shine up?
The boy grinned responsively.
Albert, miss, he corrected.
Albert be it, said Tuppence. She glanced mysteriously round the hall.
The effect was purposely a broad one in case Albert should miss it. She
leaned towards the boy and dropped her voice: I want a word with you,
Albert.
Albert ceased operations on the fittings and opened his mouth slightly.
Look! Do you know what this is? With a dramatic gesture she flung back
the left side of her coat and exposed a small enamelled badge. It was
extremely unlikely that Albert would have any knowledge of it indeed,
it would have been fatal for Tuppence s plans, since the badge in
question was the device of a local training corps originated by the
archdeacon in the early days of the war. Its presence in Tuppence s coat
was due to the fact that she had used it for pinning in some flowers a
day or two before. But Tuppence had sharp eyes, and had noted the corner
of a threepenny detective novel protruding from Albert s pocket, and the
immediate enlargement of his eyes told her that her tactics were good,
and that the fish would rise to the bait.
American Detective Force! she hissed.
Albert fell for it.
Lord! he murmured ecstatically.
Tuppence nodded at him with the air of one who has established a
thorough understanding.
Know who I m after? she inquired genially.
Albert, still round eyed, demanded breathlessly:
One of the flats?
Tuppence nodded and jerked a thumb up the stairs.
No. 20. Calls herself Vandemeyer. Vandemeyer! Ha! ha!
Albert s hand stole to his pocket.
A crook? he queried eagerly.
A crook? I should say so. Ready Rita they call her in the States.
Ready Rita, repeated Albert deliriously. Oh, ain t it just like the
pictures!
It was. Tuppence was a great frequenter of the cinema.
Annie always said as how she was a bad lot, continued the boy.
Who s Annie? inquired Tuppence idly.
Ouse parlourmaid. She s leaving to day. Many s the time Annie s said
to me: Mark my words, Albert, I wouldn t wonder if the police was to
come after her one of these days. Just like that. But she s a stunner
to look at, ain t she?
She s some peach, allowed Tuppence carelessly. Finds it useful in her
lay out, you bet. Has she been wearing any of the emeralds, by the way?
Emeralds? Them s the green stones, isn t they?
Tuppence nodded.
That s what we re after her for. You know old man Rysdale?
Albert shook his head.
Peter B. Rysdale, the oil king?
It seems sort of familiar to me.
The sparklers belonged to him. Finest collection of emeralds in the
world. Worth a million dollars!
Lumme! came ecstatically from Albert. It sounds more like the
pictures every minute.
Tuppence smiled, gratified at the success of her efforts.
We haven t exactly proved it yet. But we re after her. And she
produced a long drawn out wink I guess she won t get away with the
goods this time.
Albert uttered another ejaculation indicative of delight.
Mind you, sonny, not a word of this, said Tuppence suddenly. I guess
I oughtn t to have put you wise, but in the States we know a real smart
lad when we see one.
I ll not breathe a word, protested Albert eagerly. Ain t there
anything I could do? A bit of shadowing, maybe, or such like?
Tuppence affected to consider, then shook her head.
Not at the moment, but I ll bear you in mind, son. What s this about
the girl you say is leaving?
Annie? Regular turn up, they ad. As Annie said, servants is some one
nowadays, and to be treated accordingly, and, what with her passing the
word round, she won t find it so easy to get another.
Won t she? said Tuppence thoughtfully. I wonder
An idea was dawning in her brain. She thought a minute or two, then
tapped Albert on the shoulder.
See here, son, my brain s got busy. How would it be if you mentioned
that you d got a young cousin, or a friend of yours had, that might suit
the place. You get me?
I m there, said Albert instantly. You leave it to me, miss, and I ll
fix the whole thing up in two ticks.
Some lad! commented Tuppence, with a nod of approval. You might say
that the young woman could come in right away. You let me know, and if
it s O.K. I ll be round to morrow at eleven o clock.
Where am I to let you know to?
Ritz , replied Tuppence laconically. Name of Cowley.
Albert eyed her enviously.
It must be a good job, this tec business.
It sure is, drawled Tuppence, especially when old man Rysdale backs
the bill. But don t fret, son. If this goes well, you shall come in on
the ground floor.
With which promise she took leave of her new ally, and walked briskly
away from South Audley Mansions, well pleased with her morning s work.
But there was no time to be lost. She went straight back to the Ritz
and wrote a few brief words to Mr. Carter. Having dispatched this, and
Tommy not having yet returned which did not surprise her she started
off on a shopping expedition which, with an interval for tea and
assorted creamy cakes, occupied her until well after six o clock, and
she returned to the hotel jaded, but satisfied with her purchases.
Starting with a cheap clothing store, and passing through one or two
second hand establishments, she had finished the day at a well known
hairdresser s. Now, in the seclusion of her bedroom, she unwrapped
that final purchase. Five minutes later she smiled contentedly at her
reflection in the glass. With an actress s pencil she had slightly
altered the line of her eyebrows, and that, taken in conjunction with
the new luxuriant growth of fair hair above, so changed her appearance
that she felt confident that even if she came face to face with
Whittington he would not recognize her. She would wear elevators in her
shoes, and the cap and apron would be an even more valuable disguise.
From hospital experience she knew only too well that a nurse out of
uniform is frequently unrecognized by her patients.
Yes, said Tuppence aloud, nodding at the pert reflection in the glass,
you ll do. She then resumed her normal appearance.
Dinner was a solitary meal. Tuppence was rather surprised at Tommy s
non return. Julius, too, was absent but that to the girl s mind was
more easily explained. His hustling activities were not confined
to London, and his abrupt appearances and disappearances were fully
accepted by the Young Adventurers as part of the day s work. It
was quite on the cards that Julius P. Hersheimmer had left for
Constantinople at a moment s notice if he fancied that a clue to his
cousin s disappearance was to be found there. The energetic young
man had succeeded in making the lives of several Scotland Yard men
unbearable to them, and the telephone girls at the Admiralty had learned
to know and dread the familiar Hullo! He had spent three hours in
Paris hustling the Prefecture, and had returned from there imbued with
the idea, possibly inspired by a weary French official, that the true
clue to the mystery was to be found in Ireland.
I dare say he s dashed off there now, thought Tuppence. All very
well, but this is very dull for me! Here I am bursting with news, and
absolutely no one to tell it to! Tommy might have wired, or something. I
wonder where he is. Anyway, he can t have lost the trail as they say.
That reminds me And Miss Cowley broke off in her meditations, and
summoned a small boy.
Ten minutes later the lady was ensconced comfortably on her bed,
smoking cigarettes and deep in the perusal of Garnaby Williams, the Boy
Detective , which, with other threepenny works of lurid fiction, she had
sent out to purchase. She felt, and rightly, that before the strain
of attempting further intercourse with Albert, it would be as well to
fortify herself with a good supply of local colour.
The morning brought a note from Mr. Carter:
DEAR MISS TUPPENCE,
You have made a splendid start, and I congratulate you. I feel, though,
that I should like to point out to you once more the risks you are
running, especially if you pursue the course you indicate. Those people
are absolutely desperate and incapable of either mercy or pity. I feel
that you probably underestimate the danger, and therefore warn you
again that I can promise you no protection. You have given us valuable
information, and if you choose to withdraw now no one could blame you.
At any rate, think the matter over well before you decide.
If, in spite of my warnings, you make up your mind to go through with
it, you will find everything arranged. You have lived for two years with
Miss Dufferin, The Parsonage, Llanelly, and Mrs. Vandemeyer can apply to
her for a reference.
May I be permitted a word or two of advice? Stick as near to the truth
as possible it minimizes the danger of slips. I suggest that you
should represent yourself to be what you are, a former V.A.D., who has
chosen domestic service as a profession. There are many such at the
present time. That explains away any incongruities of voice or manner
which otherwise might awaken suspicion.
Whichever way you decide, good luck to you.
Your sincere friend,
MR. CARTER.
Tuppence s spirits rose mercurially. Mr. Carter s warnings passed
unheeded. The young lady had far too much confidence in herself to pay
any heed to them.
With some reluctance she abandoned the interesting part she had sketched
out for herself. Although she had no doubts of her own powers to sustain
a role indefinitely, she had too much common sense not to recognize the
force of Mr. Carter s arguments.
There was still no word or message from Tommy, but the morning post
brought a somewhat dirty postcard with the words: It s O.K. scrawled
upon it.
At ten thirty Tuppence surveyed with pride a slightly battered tin trunk
containing her new possessions. It was artistically corded. It was with
a slight blush that she rang the bell and ordered it to be placed in a
taxi. She drove to Paddington, and left the box in the cloak room.
She then repaired with a handbag to the fastnesses of the ladies
waiting room. Ten minutes later a metamorphosed Tuppence walked demurely
out of the station and entered a bus.
It was a few minutes past eleven when Tuppence again entered the hall
of South Audley Mansions. Albert was on the look out, attending to his
duties in a somewhat desultory fashion. He did not immediately recognize
Tuppence. When he did, his admiration was unbounded.
Blest if I d have known you! That rig out s top hole.
Glad you like it, Albert, replied Tuppence modestly. By the way, am I
your cousin, or am I not?
Your voice too, cried the delighted boy. It s as English as anything!
No, I said as a friend of mine knew a young gal. Annie wasn t best
pleased. She s stopped on till to day to oblige, she said, but really
it s so as to put you against the place.
Nice girl, said Tuppence.
Albert suspected no irony.
She s style about her, and keeps her silver a treat but, my word,
ain t she got a temper. Are you going up now, miss? Step inside the
lift. No. 20 did you say? And he winked.
Tuppence quelled him with a stern glance, and stepped inside.
As she rang the bell of No. 20 she was conscious of Albert s eyes slowly
descending beneath the level of the floor.
A smart young woman opened the door.
I ve come about the place, said Tuppence.
It s a rotten place, said the young woman without hesitation. Regular
old cat always interfering. Accused me of tampering with her letters.
Me! The flap was half undone anyway. There s never anything in the
waste paper basket she burns everything. She s a wrong un, that s what
she is. Swell clothes, but no class. Cook knows something about her but
she won t tell scared to death of her. And suspicious! She s on to you
in a minute if you as much as speak to a fellow. I can tell you
But what more Annie could tell, Tuppence was never destined to learn,
for at that moment a clear voice with a peculiarly steely ring to it
called:
Annie!
The smart young woman jumped as if she had been shot.
Yes, ma am.
Who are you talking to?
It s a young woman about the situation, ma am.
Show her in then. At once.
Yes, ma am.
Tuppence was ushered into a room on the right of the long passage. A
woman was standing by the fireplace. She was no longer in her first
youth, and the beauty she undeniably possessed was hardened and
coarsened. In her youth she must have been dazzling. Her pale gold hair,
owing a slight assistance to art, was coiled low on her neck, her eyes,
of a piercing electric blue, seemed to possess a faculty of boring into
the very soul of the person she was looking at. Her exquisite figure was
enhanced by a wonderful gown of indigo charmeuse. And yet, despite her
swaying grace, and the almost ethereal beauty of her face, you felt
instinctively the presence of something hard and menacing, a kind of
metallic strength that found expression in the tones of her voice and in
that gimlet like quality of her eyes.
For the first time Tuppence felt afraid. She had not feared Whittington,
but this woman was different. As if fascinated, she watched the long
cruel line of the red curving mouth, and again she felt that sensation
of panic pass over her. Her usual self confidence deserted her. Vaguely
she felt that deceiving this woman would be very different to deceiving
Whittington. Mr. Carter s warning recurred to her mind. Here, indeed,
she might expect no mercy.
Fighting down that instinct of panic which urged her to turn tail and
run without further delay, Tuppence returned the lady s gaze firmly and
respectfully.
As though that first scrutiny had been satisfactory, Mrs. Vandemeyer
motioned to a chair.
You can sit down. How did you hear I wanted a house parlourmaid?
Through a friend who knows the lift boy here. He thought the place
might suit me.
Again that basilisk glance seemed to pierce her through.
You speak like an educated girl?
Glibly enough, Tuppence ran through her imaginary career on the lines
suggested by Mr. Carter. It seemed to her, as she did so, that the
tension of Mrs. Vandemeyer s attitude relaxed.
I see, she remarked at length. Is there anyone I can write to for a
reference?
I lived last with a Miss Dufferin, The Parsonage, Llanelly. I was with
her two years.
And then you thought you would get more money by coming to London,
I suppose? Well, it doesn t matter to me. I will give you
50 60 whatever you want. You can come in at once?
Yes, ma am. To day, if you like. My box is at Paddington.
Go and fetch it in a taxi, then. It s an easy place. I am out a good
deal. By the way, what s your name?
Prudence Cooper, ma am.
Very well, Prudence. Go away and fetch your box. I shall be out to
lunch. The cook will show you where everything is.
Thank you, ma am.
Tuppence withdrew. The smart Annie was not in evidence. In the hall
below a magnificent hall porter had relegated Albert to the background.
Tuppence did not even glance at him as she passed meekly out.
The adventure had begun, but she felt less elated than she had done
earlier in the morning. It crossed her mind that if the unknown Jane
Finn had fallen into the hands of Mrs. Vandemeyer, it was likely to have
gone hard with her.
CHAPTER X. ENTER SIR JAMES PEEL EDGERTON
TUPPENCE betrayed no awkwardness in her new duties. The daughters of the
archdeacon were well grounded in household tasks. They were also experts
in training a raw girl, the inevitable result being that the raw girl,
once trained, departed elsewhere where her newly acquired knowledge
commanded a more substantial remuneration than the archdeacon s meagre
purse allowed.
Tuppence had therefore very little fear of proving inefficient. Mrs.
Vandemeyer s cook puzzled her. She evidently went in deadly terror of
her mistress. The girl thought it probable that the other woman had some
hold over her. For the rest, she cooked like a chef , as Tuppence had
an opportunity of judging that evening. Mrs. Vandemeyer was expecting a
guest to dinner, and Tuppence accordingly laid the beautifully polished
table for two. She was a little exercised in her own mind as to this
visitor. It was highly possible that it might prove to be Whittington.
Although she felt fairly confident that he would not recognize her, yet
she would have been better pleased had the guest proved to be a total
stranger. However, there was nothing for it but to hope for the best.
At a few minutes past eight the front door bell rang, and Tuppence went
to answer it with some inward trepidation. She was relieved to see that
the visitor was the second of the two men whom Tommy had taken upon
himself to follow.
He gave his name as Count Stepanov. Tuppence announced him, and Mrs.
Vandemeyer rose from her seat on a low divan with a quick murmur of
pleasure.
It is delightful to see you, Boris Ivanovitch, she said.
And you, madame! He bowed low over her hand.
Tuppence returned to the kitchen.
Count Stepanov, or some such, she remarked, and affecting a frank and
unvarnished curiosity: Who s he?
A Russian gentleman, I believe.
Come here much?
Once in a while. What d you want to know for?
Fancied he might be sweet on the missus, that s all, explained the
girl, adding with an appearance of sulkiness: How you do take one up!
I m not quite easy in my mind about the souffl , explained the
other.
You know something, thought Tuppence to herself, but aloud she only
said: Going to dish up now? Right o.
Whilst waiting at table, Tuppence listened closely to all that was said.
She remembered that this was one of the men Tommy was shadowing when she
had last seen him. Already, although she would hardly admit it, she was
becoming uneasy about her partner. Where was he? Why had no word of any
kind come from him? She had arranged before leaving the Ritz to have
all letters or messages sent on at once by special messenger to a small
stationer s shop near at hand where Albert was to call in frequently.
True, it was only yesterday morning that she had parted from Tommy, and
she told herself that any anxiety on his behalf would be absurd. Still,
it was strange that he had sent no word of any kind.
But, listen as she might, the conversation presented no clue. Boris and
Mrs. Vandemeyer talked on purely indifferent subjects: plays they had
seen, new dances, and the latest society gossip. After dinner they
repaired to the small boudoir where Mrs. Vandemeyer, stretched on the
divan, looked more wickedly beautiful than ever. Tuppence brought in the
coffee and liqueurs and unwillingly retired. As she did so, she heard
Boris say:
New, isn t she?
She came in to day. The other was a fiend. This girl seems all right.
She waits well.
Tuppence lingered a moment longer by the door which she had carefully
neglected to close, and heard him say:
Quite safe, I suppose?
Really, Boris, you are absurdly suspicious. I believe she s the cousin
of the hall porter, or something of the kind. And nobody even dreams
that I have any connection with our mutual friend, Mr. Brown.
For heaven s sake, be careful, Rita. That door isn t shut.
Well, shut it then, laughed the woman.
Tuppence removed herself speedily.
She dared not absent herself longer from the back premises, but she
cleared away and washed up with a breathless speed acquired in hospital.
Then she slipped quietly back to the boudoir door. The cook, more
leisurely, was still busy in the kitchen and, if she missed the other,
would only suppose her to be turning down the beds.
Alas! The conversation inside was being carried on in too low a tone
to permit of her hearing anything of it. She dared not reopen the
door, however gently. Mrs. Vandemeyer was sitting almost facing it, and
Tuppence respected her mistress s lynx eyed powers of observation.
Nevertheless, she felt she would give a good deal to overhear what was
going on. Possibly, if anything unforeseen had happened, she might get
news of Tommy. For some moments she reflected desperately, then her
face brightened. She went quickly along the passage to Mrs. Vandemeyer s
bedroom, which had long French windows leading on to a balcony that ran
the length of the flat. Slipping quickly through the window, Tuppence
crept noiselessly along till she reached the boudoir window. As she
had thought it stood a little ajar, and the voices within were plainly
audible.
Tuppence listened attentively, but there was no mention of anything
that could be twisted to apply to Tommy. Mrs. Vandemeyer and the Russian
seemed to be at variance over some matter, and finally the latter
exclaimed bitterly:
With your persistent recklessness, you will end by ruining us!
Bah! laughed the woman. Notoriety of the right kind is the best way
of disarming suspicion. You will realize that one of these days perhaps
sooner than you think!
In the meantime, you are going about everywhere with Peel Edgerton.
Not only is he, perhaps, the most celebrated K.C. in England, but his
special hobby is criminology! It is madness!
I know that his eloquence has saved untold men from the gallows, said
Mrs. Vandemeyer calmly. What of it? I may need his assistance in that
line myself some day. If so, how fortunate to have such a friend at
court or perhaps it would be more to the point to say in court.
Boris got up and began striding up and down. He was very excited.
You are a clever woman, Rita; but you are also a fool! Be guided by me,
and give up Peel Edgerton.
Mrs. Vandemeyer shook her head gently.
I think not.
You refuse? There was an ugly ring in the Russian s voice.
I do.
Then, by Heaven, snarled the Russian, we will see
But Mrs. Vandemeyer also rose to her feet, her eyes flashing.
You forget, Boris, she said. I am accountable to no one. I take my
orders only from Mr. Brown.
The other threw up his hands in despair.
You are impossible, he muttered. Impossible! Already it may be too
late. They say Peel Edgerton can smell a criminal! How do we know what
is at the bottom of his sudden interest in you? Perhaps even now his
suspicions are aroused. He guesses
Mrs. Vandemeyer eyed him scornfully.
Reassure yourself, my dear Boris. He suspects nothing. With less than
your usual chivalry, you seem to forget that I am commonly accounted a
beautiful woman. I assure you that is all that interests Peel Edgerton.
Boris shook his head doubtfully.
He has studied crime as no other man in this kingdom has studied it. Do
you fancy that you can deceive him?
Mrs. Vandemeyer s eyes narrowed.
If he is all that you say it would amuse me to try!
Good heavens, Rita
Besides, added Mrs. Vandemeyer, he is extremely rich. I am not one
who despises money. The sinews of war, you know, Boris!
Money money! That is always the danger with you, Rita. I believe you
would sell your soul for money. I believe He paused, then in a
low, sinister voice he said slowly: Sometimes I believe that you would
sell us!
Mrs. Vandemeyer smiled and shrugged her shoulders.
The price, at any rate, would have to be enormous, she said lightly.
It would be beyond the power of anyone but a millionaire to pay.
Ah! snarled the Russian. You see, I was right!
My dear Boris, can you not take a joke?
Was it a joke?
Of course.
Then all I can say is that your ideas of humour are peculiar, my dear
Rita.
Mrs. Vandemeyer smiled.
Let us not quarrel, Boris. Touch the bell. We will have some drinks.
Tuppence beat a hasty retreat. She paused a moment to survey herself in
Mrs. Vandemeyer s long glass, and be sure that nothing was amiss with
her appearance. Then she answered the bell demurely.
The conversation that she had overheard, although interesting in that
it proved beyond doubt the complicity of both Rita and Boris, threw very
little light on the present preoccupations. The name of Jane Finn had
not even been mentioned.
The following morning a few brief words with Albert informed her that
nothing was waiting for her at the stationer s. It seemed incredible
that Tommy, if all was well with him, should not send any word to her.
A cold hand seemed to close round her heart.... Supposing.... She choked
her fears down bravely. It was no good worrying. But she leapt at a
chance offered her by Mrs. Vandemeyer.
What day do you usually go out, Prudence?
Friday s my usual day, ma am.
Mrs. Vandemeyer lifted her eyebrows.
And to day is Friday! But I suppose you hardly wish to go out to day,
as you only came yesterday.
I was thinking of asking you if I might, ma am.
Mrs. Vandemeyer looked at her a minute longer, and then smiled.
I wish Count Stepanov could hear you. He made a suggestion about
you last night. Her smile broadened, catlike. Your request is
very typical. I am satisfied. You do not understand all this but
you can go out to day. It makes no difference to me, as I shall not be
dining at home.
Thank you, ma am.
Tuppence felt a sensation of relief once she was out of the other s
presence. Once again she admitted to herself that she was afraid,
horribly afraid, of the beautiful woman with the cruel eyes.
In the midst of a final desultory polishing of her silver, Tuppence was
disturbed by the ringing of the front door bell, and went to answer it.
This time the visitor was neither Whittington nor Boris, but a man of
striking appearance.
Just a shade over average height, he nevertheless conveyed the
impression of a big man. His face, clean shaven and exquisitely mobile,
was stamped with an expression of power and force far beyond the
ordinary. Magnetism seemed to radiate from him.
Tuppence was undecided for the moment whether to put him down as an
actor or a lawyer, but her doubts were soon solved as he gave her his
name: Sir James Peel Edgerton.
She looked at him with renewed interest. This, then, was the famous K.C.
whose name was familiar all over England. She had heard it said that he
might one day be Prime Minister. He was known to have refused office in
the interests of his profession, preferring to remain a simple Member
for a Scotch constituency.
Tuppence went back to her pantry thoughtfully. The great man had
impressed her. She understood Boris s agitation. Peel Edgerton would not
be an easy man to deceive.
In about a quarter of an hour the bell rang, and Tuppence repaired to
the hall to show the visitor out. He had given her a piercing glance
before. Now, as she handed him his hat and stick, she was conscious of
his eyes raking her through. As she opened the door and stood aside to
let him pass out, he stopped in the doorway.
Not been doing this long, eh?
Tuppence raised her eyes, astonished. She read in his glance kindliness,
and something else more difficult to fathom.
He nodded as though she had answered.
V.A.D. and hard up, I suppose?
Did Mrs. Vandemeyer tell you that? asked Tuppence suspiciously.
No, child. The look of you told me. Good place here?
Very good, thank you, sir.
Ah, but there are plenty of good places nowadays. And a change does no
harm sometimes.
Do you mean ? began Tuppence.
But Sir James was already on the topmost stair. He looked back with his
kindly, shrewd glance.
Just a hint, he said. That s all.
Tuppence went back to the pantry more thoughtful than ever.
CHAPTER XI. JULIUS TELLS A STORY
DRESSED appropriately, Tuppence duly sallied forth for her afternoon
out. Albert was in temporary abeyance, but Tuppence went herself to the
stationer s to make quite sure that nothing had come for her. Satisfied
on this point, she made her way to the Ritz . On inquiry she learnt
that Tommy had not yet returned. It was the answer she had expected, but
it was another nail in the coffin of her hopes. She resolved to appeal
to Mr. Carter, telling him when and where Tommy had started on his
quest, and asking him to do something to trace him. The prospect of
his aid revived her mercurial spirits, and she next inquired for Julius
Hersheimmer. The reply she got was to the effect that he had returned
about half an hour ago, but had gone out immediately.
Tuppence s spirits revived still more. It would be something to see
Julius. Perhaps he could devise some plan for finding out what
had become of Tommy. She wrote her note to Mr. Carter in Julius s
sitting room, and was just addressing the envelope when the door burst
open.
What the hell began Julius, but checked himself abruptly. I beg
your pardon, Miss Tuppence. Those fools down at the office would have it
that Beresford wasn t here any longer hadn t been here since Wednesday.
Is that so?
Tuppence nodded.
You don t know where he is? she asked faintly.
I? How should I know? I haven t had one darned word from him, though I
wired him yesterday morning.
I expect your wire s at the office unopened.
But where is he?
I don t know. I hoped you might.
I tell you I haven t had one darned word from him since we parted at
the depot on Wednesday.
What depot?
Waterloo. Your London and South Western road.
Waterloo? frowned Tuppence.
Why, yes. Didn t he tell you?
I haven t seen him either, replied Tuppence impatiently. Go on about
Waterloo. What were you doing there?
He gave me a call. Over the phone. Told me to get a move on, and
hustle. Said he was trailing two crooks.
Oh! said Tuppence, her eyes opening. I see. Go on.
I hurried along right away. Beresford was there. He pointed out the
crooks. The big one was mine, the guy you bluffed. Tommy shoved a ticket
into my hand and told me to get aboard the cars. He was going to sleuth
the other crook. Julius paused. I thought for sure you d know all
this.
Julius, said Tuppence firmly, stop walking up and down. It makes me
giddy. Sit down in that armchair, and tell me the whole story with as
few fancy turns of speech as possible.
Mr. Hersheimmer obeyed.
Sure, he said. Where shall I begin?
Where you left off. At Waterloo.
Well, began Julius, I got into one of your dear old fashioned
first class British compartments. The train was just off. First thing I
knew a guard came along and informed me mighty politely that I wasn t
in a smoking carriage. I handed him out half a dollar, and that settled
that. I did a bit of prospecting along the corridor to the next coach.
Whittington was there right enough. When I saw the skunk, with his big
sleek fat face, and thought of poor little Jane in his clutches, I felt
real mad that I hadn t got a gun with me. I d have tickled him up some.
We got to Bournemouth all right. Whittington took a cab and gave the
name of an hotel. I did likewise, and we drove up within three minutes
of each other. He hired a room, and I hired one too. So far it was all
plain sailing. He hadn t the remotest notion that anyone was on to him.
Well, he just sat around in the hotel lounge, reading the papers and so
on, till it was time for dinner. He didn t hurry any over that either.
I began to think that there was nothing doing, that he d just come on
the trip for his health, but I remembered that he hadn t changed for
dinner, though it was by way of being a slap up hotel, so it seemed
likely enough that he d be going out on his real business afterwards.
Sure enough, about nine o clock, so he did. Took a car across the
town mighty pretty place by the way, I guess I ll take Jane there for
a spell when I find her and then paid it off and struck out along those
pine woods on the top of the cliff. I was there too, you understand.
We walked, maybe, for half an hour. There s a lot of villas all the way
along, but by degrees they seemed to get more and more thinned out, and
in the end we got to one that seemed the last of the bunch. Big house it
was, with a lot of piny grounds around it.
It was a pretty black night, and the carriage drive up to the house was
dark as pitch. I could hear him ahead, though I couldn t see him. I
had to walk carefully in case he might get on to it that he was being
followed. I turned a curve and I was just in time to see him ring the
bell and get admitted to the house. I just stopped where I was. It was
beginning to rain, and I was soon pretty near soaked through. Also, it
was almighty cold.
Whittington didn t come out again, and by and by I got kind of restive,
and began to mouch around. All the ground floor windows were shuttered
tight, but upstairs, on the first floor it was a two storied house I
noticed a window with a light burning and the curtains not drawn.
Now, just opposite to that window, there was a tree growing. It was
about thirty foot away from the house, maybe, and I sort of got it into
my head that, if I climbed up that tree, I d very likely be able to see
into that room. Of course, I knew there was no reason why Whittington
should be in that room rather than in any other less reason, in fact,
for the betting would be on his being in one of the reception rooms
downstairs. But I guess I d got the hump from standing so long in the
rain, and anything seemed better than going on doing nothing. So I
started up.
It wasn t so easy, by a long chalk! The rain had made the boughs mighty
slippery, and it was all I could do to keep a foothold, but bit by bit I
managed it, until at last there I was level with the window.
But then I was disappointed. I was too far to the left. I could only
see sideways into the room. A bit of curtain, and a yard of wallpaper
was all I could command. Well, that wasn t any manner of good to me, but
just as I was going to give it up, and climb down ignominiously, some
one inside moved and threw his shadow on my little bit of wall and, by
gum, it was Whittington!
After that, my blood was up. I d just got to get a look into that
room. It was up to me to figure out how. I noticed that there was a long
branch running out from the tree in the right direction. If I could only
swarm about half way along it, the proposition would be solved. But it
was mighty uncertain whether it would bear my weight. I decided I d
just got to risk that, and I started. Very cautiously, inch by inch, I
crawled along. The bough creaked and swayed in a nasty fashion, and it
didn t do to think of the drop below, but at last I got safely to where
I wanted to be.
The room was medium sized, furnished in a kind of bare hygienic way.
There was a table with a lamp on it in the middle of the room, and
sitting at that table, facing towards me, was Whittington right enough.
He was talking to a woman dressed as a hospital nurse. She was sitting
with her back to me, so I couldn t see her face. Although the blinds
were up, the window itself was shut, so I couldn t catch a word of what
they said. Whittington seemed to be doing all the talking, and the nurse
just listened. Now and then she nodded, and sometimes she d shake
her head, as though she were answering questions. He seemed very
emphatic once or twice he beat with his fist on the table. The rain had
stopped now, and the sky was clearing in that sudden way it does.
Presently, he seemed to get to the end of what he was saying. He got
up, and so did she. He looked towards the window and asked something I
guess it was whether it was raining. Anyway, she came right across and
looked out. Just then the moon came out from behind the clouds. I
was scared the woman would catch sight of me, for I was full in the
moonlight. I tried to move back a bit. The jerk I gave was too much for
that rotten old branch. With an almighty crash, down it came, and Julius
P. Hersheimmer with it!
Oh, Julius, breathed Tuppence, how exciting! Go on.
Well, luckily for me, I pitched down into a good soft bed of earth but
it put me out of action for the time, sure enough. The next thing I
knew, I was lying in bed with a hospital nurse not Whittington s one
on one side of me, and a little black bearded man with gold glasses,
and medical man written all over him, on the other. He rubbed his hands
together, and raised his eyebrows as I stared at him. Ah! he said. So
our young friend is coming round again. Capital. Capital.
I did the usual stunt. Said: What s happened? And Where am I? But
I knew the answer to the last well enough. There s no moss growing on
my brain. I think that ll do for the present, sister, said the little
man, and the nurse left the room in a sort of brisk well trained way.
But I caught her handing me out a look of deep curiosity as she passed
through the door.
That look of hers gave me an idea. Now then, doc, I said, and tried
to sit up in bed, but my right foot gave me a nasty twinge as I did so.
A slight sprain, explained the doctor. Nothing serious. You ll be
about again in a couple of days.
I noticed you walked lame, interpolated Tuppence.
Julius nodded, and continued:
How did it happen? I asked again. He replied dryly. You fell, with
a considerable portion of one of my trees, into one of my newly planted
flower beds.
I liked the man. He seemed to have a sense of humour. I felt sure that
he, at least, was plumb straight. Sure, doc, I said, I m sorry about
the tree, and I guess the new bulbs will be on me. But perhaps you d
like to know what I was doing in your garden? I think the facts do
call for an explanation, he replied. Well, to begin with, I wasn t
after the spoons.
He smiled. My first theory. But I soon altered my mind. By the way,
you are an American, are you not? I told him my name. And you? I am
Dr. Hall, and this, as you doubtless know, is my private nursing home.
I didn t know, but I wasn t going to put him wise. I was just thankful
for the information. I liked the man, and I felt he was straight, but
I wasn t going to give him the whole story. For one thing he probably
wouldn t have believed it.
I made up my mind in a flash. Why, doctor, I said, I guess I feel
an almighty fool, but I owe it to you to let you know that it wasn t
the Bill Sikes business I was up to. Then I went on and mumbled out
something about a girl. I trotted out the stern guardian business, and a
nervous breakdown, and finally explained that I had fancied I recognized
her among the patients at the home, hence my nocturnal adventures. I
guess it was just the kind of story he was expecting. Quite a romance,
he said genially, when I d finished. Now, doc, I went on, will you
be frank with me? Have you here now, or have you had here at any time,
a young girl called Jane Finn? He repeated the name thoughtfully. Jane
Finn? he said. No.
I was chagrined, and I guess I showed it. You are sure? Quite sure,
Mr. Hersheimmer. It is an uncommon name, and I should not have been
likely to forget it.
Well, that was flat. It laid me out for a space. I d kind of hoped
my search was at an end. That s that, I said at last. Now, there s
another matter. When I was hugging that darned branch I thought I
recognized an old friend of mine talking to one of your nurses. I
purposely didn t mention any name because, of course, Whittington might
be calling himself something quite different down here, but the doctor
answered at once. Mr. Whittington, perhaps? That s the fellow, I
replied. What s he doing down here? Don t tell me his nerves are out
of order?
Dr. Hall laughed. No. He came down to see one of my nurses, Nurse
Edith, who is a niece of his. Why, fancy that! I exclaimed. Is he
still here? No, he went back to town almost immediately. What a
pity! I ejaculated. But perhaps I could speak to his niece Nurse
Edith, did you say her name was?
But the doctor shook his head. I m afraid that, too, is impossible.
Nurse Edith left with a patient to night also. I seem to be real
unlucky, I remarked. Have you Mr. Whittington s address in town?
I guess I d like to look him up when I get back. I don t know his
address. I can write to Nurse Edith for it if you like. I thanked him.
Don t say who it is wants it. I d like to give him a little surprise.
That was about all I could do for the moment. Of course, if the girl
was really Whittington s niece, she might be too cute to fall into the
trap, but it was worth trying. Next thing I did was to write out a wire
to Beresford saying where I was, and that I was laid up with a sprained
foot, and telling him to come down if he wasn t busy. I had to be
guarded in what I said. However, I didn t hear from him, and my foot
soon got all right. It was only ricked, not really sprained, so to day I
said good bye to the little doctor chap, asked him to send me word if
he heard from Nurse Edith, and came right away back to town. Say, Miss
Tuppence, you re looking mighty pale!
It s Tommy, said Tuppence. What can have happened to him?
Buck up, I guess he s all right really. Why shouldn t he be? See here,
it was a foreign looking guy he went off after. Maybe they ve gone
abroad to Poland, or something like that?
Tuppence shook her head.
He couldn t without passports and things. Besides I ve seen that man,
Boris Something, since. He dined with Mrs. Vandemeyer last night.
Mrs. Who?
I forgot. Of course you don t know all that.
I m listening, said Julius, and gave vent to his favourite expression.
Put me wise.
Tuppence thereupon related the events of the last two days. Julius s
astonishment and admiration were unbounded.
Bully for you! Fancy you a menial. It just tickles me to death! Then
he added seriously: But say now, I don t like it, Miss Tuppence, I sure
don t. You re just as plucky as they make em, but I wish you d keep
right out of this. These crooks we re up against would as soon croak a
girl as a man any day.
Do you think I m afraid? said Tuppence indignantly, valiantly
repressing memories of the steely glitter in Mrs. Vandemeyer s eyes.
I said before you were darned plucky. But that doesn t alter facts.
Oh, bother me! said Tuppence impatiently. Let s think about what
can have happened to Tommy. I ve written to Mr. Carter about it, she
added, and told him the gist of her letter.
Julius nodded gravely.
I guess that s good as far as it goes. But it s for us to get busy and
do something.
What can we do? asked Tuppence, her spirits rising.
I guess we d better get on the track of Boris. You say he s been to
your place. Is he likely to come again?
He might. I really don t know.
I see. Well, I guess I d better buy a car, a slap up one, dress as a
chauffeur and hang about outside. Then if Boris comes, you could make
some kind of signal, and I d trail him. How s that?
Splendid, but he mightn t come for weeks.
We ll have to chance that. I m glad you like the plan. He rose.
Where are you going?
To buy the car, of course, replied Julius, surprised. What make do
you like? I guess you ll do some riding in it before we ve finished.
Oh, said Tuppence faintly, I like Rolls Royces, but
Sure, agreed Julius. What you say goes. I ll get one.
But you can t at once, cried Tuppence. People wait ages sometimes.
Little Julius doesn t, affirmed Mr. Hersheimmer. Don t you worry any.
I ll be round in the car in half an hour.
Tuppence got up.
You re awfully good, Julius. But I can t help feeling that it s rather
a forlorn hope. I m really pinning my faith to Mr. Carter.
Then I shouldn t.
Why?
Just an idea of mine.
Oh; but he must do something. There s no one else. By the way, I forgot
to tell you of a queer thing that happened this morning.
And she narrated her encounter with Sir James Peel Edgerton. Julius was
interested.
What did the guy mean, do you think? he asked.
I don t quite know, said Tuppence meditatively. But I think that, in
an ambiguous, legal, without prejudishish lawyer s way, he was trying to
warn me.
Why should he?
I don t know, confessed Tuppence. But he looked kind, and
simply awfully clever. I wouldn t mind going to him and telling him
everything.
Somewhat to her surprise, Julius negatived the idea sharply.
See here, he said, we don t want any lawyers mixed up in this. That
guy couldn t help us any.
Well, I believe he could, reiterated Tuppence obstinately.
Don t you think it. So long. I ll be back in half an hour.
Thirty five minutes had elapsed when Julius returned. He took Tuppence
by the arm, and walked her to the window.
There she is.
Oh! said Tuppence with a note of reverence in her voice, as she gazed
down at the enormous car.
She s some pace maker, I can tell you, said Julius complacently.
How did you get it? gasped Tuppence.
She was just being sent home to some bigwig.
Well?
I went round to his house, said Julius. I said that I reckoned a car
like that was worth every penny of twenty thousand dollars. Then I told
him that it was worth just about fifty thousand dollars to me if he d
get out.
Well? said Tuppence, intoxicated.
Well, returned Julius, he got out, that s all.
CHAPTER XII. A FRIEND IN NEED
FRIDAY and Saturday passed uneventfully. Tuppence had received a brief
answer to her appeal from Mr. Carter. In it he pointed out that the
Young Adventurers had undertaken the work at their own risk, and had
been fully warned of the dangers. If anything had happened to Tommy he
regretted it deeply, but he could do nothing.
This was cold comfort. Somehow, without Tommy, all the savour went out
of the adventure, and, for the first time, Tuppence felt doubtful of
success. While they had been together she had never questioned it for
a minute. Although she was accustomed to take the lead, and to pride
herself on her quick wittedness, in reality she had relied upon Tommy
more than she realized at the time. There was something so eminently
sober and clear headed about him, his common sense and soundness of
vision were so unvarying, that without him Tuppence felt much like a
rudderless ship. It was curious that Julius, who was undoubtedly much
cleverer than Tommy, did not give her the same feeling of support. She
had accused Tommy of being a pessimist, and it is certain that he
always saw the disadvantages and difficulties which she herself was
optimistically given to overlooking, but nevertheless she had really
relied a good deal on his judgment. He might be slow, but he was very
sure.
It seemed to the girl that, for the first time, she realized the
sinister character of the mission they had undertaken so lightheartedly.
It had begun like a page of romance. Now, shorn of its glamour, it
seemed to be turning to grim reality. Tommy that was all that mattered.
Many times in the day Tuppence blinked the tears out of her eyes
resolutely. Little fool, she would apostrophize herself, don t
snivel. Of course you re fond of him. You ve known him all your life.
But there s no need to be sentimental about it.
In the meantime, nothing more was seen of Boris. He did not come to the
flat, and Julius and the car waited in vain. Tuppence gave herself over
to new meditations. Whilst admitting the truth of Julius s objections,
she had nevertheless not entirely relinquished the idea of appealing to
Sir James Peel Edgerton. Indeed, she had gone so far as to look up his
address in the Red Book . Had he meant to warn her that day? If so,
why? Surely she was at least entitled to demand an explanation. He had
looked at her so kindly. Perhaps he might tell them something concerning
Mrs. Vandemeyer which might lead to a clue to Tommy s whereabouts.
Anyway, Tuppence decided, with her usual shake of the shoulders, it was
worth trying, and try it she would. Sunday was her afternoon out. She
would meet Julius, persuade him to her point of view, and they would
beard the lion in his den.
When the day arrived Julius needed a considerable amount of persuading,
but Tuppence held firm. It can do no harm, was what she always came
back to. In the end Julius gave in, and they proceeded in the car to
Carlton House Terrace.
The door was opened by an irreproachable butler. Tuppence felt a little
nervous. After all, perhaps it was colossal cheek on her part. She
had decided not to ask if Sir James was at home, but to adopt a more
personal attitude.
Will you ask Sir James if I can see him for a few minutes? I have an
important message for him.
The butler retired, returning a moment or two later.
Sir James will see you. Will you step this way?
He ushered them into a room at the back of the house, furnished as a
library. The collection of books was a magnificent one, and Tuppence
noticed that all one wall was devoted to works on crime and criminology.
There were several deep padded leather arm chairs, and an old fashioned
open hearth. In the window was a big roll top desk strewn with papers at
which the master of the house was sitting.
He rose as they entered.
You have a message for me? Ah he recognized Tuppence with a
smile it s you, is it? Brought a message from Mrs. Vandemeyer, I
suppose?
Not exactly, said Tuppence. In fact, I m afraid I only said that to
be quite sure of getting in. Oh, by the way, this is Mr. Hersheimmer,
Sir James Peel Edgerton.
Pleased to meet you, said the American, shooting out a hand.
Won t you both sit down? asked Sir James. He drew forward two chairs.
Sir James, said Tuppence, plunging boldly, I dare say you will think
it is most awful cheek of me coming here like this. Because, of course,
it s nothing whatever to do with you, and then you re a very important
person, and of course Tommy and I are very unimportant. She paused for
breath.
Tommy? queried Sir James, looking across at the American.
No, that s Julius, explained Tuppence. I m rather nervous, and that
makes me tell it badly. What I really want to know is what you meant by
what you said to me the other day? Did you mean to warn me against Mrs.
Vandemeyer? You did, didn t you?
My dear young lady, as far as I recollect I only mentioned that there
were equally good situations to be obtained elsewhere.
Yes, I know. But it was a hint, wasn t it?
Well, perhaps it was, admitted Sir James gravely.
Well, I want to know more. I want to know just why you gave me a
hint.
Sir James smiled at her earnestness.
Suppose the lady brings a libel action against me for defamation of
character?
Of course, said Tuppence. I know lawyers are always dreadfully
careful. But can t we say without prejudice first, and then say just
what we want to.
Well, said Sir James, still smiling, without prejudice, then, if I
had a young sister forced to earn her living, I should not like to see
her in Mrs. Vandemeyer s service. I felt it incumbent on me just to give
you a hint. It is no place for a young and inexperienced girl. That is
all I can tell you.
I see, said Tuppence thoughtfully. Thank you very much. But I m not
really inexperienced, you know. I knew perfectly that she was a bad
lot when I went there as a matter of fact that s why I went She
broke off, seeing some bewilderment on the lawyer s face, and went on:
I think perhaps I d better tell you the whole story, Sir James. I ve a
sort of feeling that you d know in a minute if I didn t tell the truth,
and so you might as well know all about it from the beginning. What do
you think, Julius?
As you re bent on it, I d go right ahead with the facts, replied the
American, who had so far sat in silence.
Yes, tell me all about it, said Sir James. I want to know who Tommy
is.
Thus encouraged Tuppence plunged into her tale, and the lawyer listened
with close attention.
Very interesting, he said, when she finished. A great deal of what
you tell me, child, is already known to me. I ve had certain theories
of my own about this Jane Finn. You ve done extraordinarily well so
far, but it s rather too bad of what do you know him as? Mr. Carter to
pitchfork you two young things into an affair of this kind. By the
way, where did Mr. Hersheimmer come in originally? You didn t make that
clear?
Julius answered for himself.
I m Jane s first cousin, he explained, returning the lawyer s keen
gaze.
Ah!
Oh, Sir James, broke out Tuppence, what do you think has become of
Tommy?
H m. The lawyer rose, and paced slowly up and down. When you arrived,
young lady, I was just packing up my traps. Going to Scotland by the
night train for a few days fishing. But there are different kinds of
fishing. I ve a good mind to stay, and see if we can t get on the track
of that young chap.
Oh! Tuppence clasped her hands ecstatically.
All the same, as I said before, it s too bad of of Carter to set you
two babies on a job like this. Now, don t get offended, Miss er
Cowley. Prudence Cowley. But my friends call me Tuppence.
Well, Miss Tuppence, then, as I m certainly going to be a friend. Don t
be offended because I think you re young. Youth is a failing only too
easily outgrown. Now, about this young Tommy of yours
Yes. Tuppence clasped her hands.
Frankly, things look bad for him. He s been butting in somewhere where
he wasn t wanted. Not a doubt of it. But don t give up hope.
And you really will help us? There, Julius! He didn t want me to come,
she added by way of explanation.
H m, said the lawyer, favouring Julius with another keen glance. And
why was that?
I reckoned it would be no good worrying you with a petty little
business like this.
I see. He paused a moment. This petty little business, as you call
it, bears directly on a very big business, bigger perhaps than either
you or Miss Tuppence know. If this boy is alive, he may have very
valuable information to give us. Therefore, we must find him.
Yes, but how? cried Tuppence. I ve tried to think of everything.
Sir James smiled.
And yet there s one person quite near at hand who in all probability
knows where he is, or at all events where he is likely to be.
Who is that? asked Tuppence, puzzled.
Mrs. Vandemeyer.
Yes, but she d never tell us.
Ah, that is where I come in. I think it quite likely that I shall be
able to make Mrs. Vandemeyer tell me what I want to know.
How? demanded Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide.
Oh, just by asking her questions, replied Sir James easily. That s
the way we do it, you know.
He tapped with his finger on the table, and Tuppence felt again the
intense power that radiated from the man.
And if she won t tell? asked Julius suddenly.
I think she will. I have one or two powerful levers. Still, in that
unlikely event, there is always the possibility of bribery.
Sure. And that s where I come in! cried Julius, bringing his fist down
on the table with a bang. You can count on me, if necessary, for one
million dollars. Yes, sir, one million dollars!
Sir James sat down and subjected Julius to a long scrutiny.
Mr. Hersheimmer, he said at last, that is a very large sum.
I guess it ll have to be. These aren t the kind of folk to offer
sixpence to.
At the present rate of exchange it amounts to considerably over two
hundred and fifty thousand pounds.
That s so. Maybe you think I m talking through my hat, but I can
deliver the goods all right, with enough over to spare for your fee.
Sir James flushed slightly.
There is no question of a fee, Mr. Hersheimmer. I am not a private
detective.
Sorry. I guess I was just a mite hasty, but I ve been feeling bad about
this money question. I wanted to offer a big reward for news of Jane
some days ago, but your crusted institution of Scotland Yard advised me
against it. Said it was undesirable.
They were probably right, said Sir James dryly.
But it s all O.K. about Julius, put in Tuppence. He s not pulling
your leg. He s got simply pots of money.
The old man piled it up in style, explained Julius. Now, let s get
down to it. What s your idea?
Sir James considered for a moment or two.
There is no time to be lost. The sooner we strike the better. He
turned to Tuppence. Is Mrs. Vandemeyer dining out to night, do you
know?
Yes, I think so, but she will not be out late. Otherwise, she would
have taken the latchkey.
Good. I will call upon her about ten o clock. What time are you
supposed to return?
About nine thirty or ten, but I could go back earlier.
You must not do that on any account. It might arouse suspicion if you
did not stay out till the usual time. Be back by nine thirty. I will
arrive at ten. Mr. Hersheimmer will wait below in a taxi perhaps.
He s got a new Rolls Royce car, said Tuppence with vicarious pride.
Even better. If I succeed in obtaining the address from her, we can
go there at once, taking Mrs. Vandemeyer with us if necessary. You
understand?
Yes. Tuppence rose to her feet with a skip of delight. Oh, I feel so
much better!
Don t build on it too much, Miss Tuppence. Go easy.
Julius turned to the lawyer.
Say, then. I ll call for you in the car round about nine thirty. Is
that right?
Perhaps that will be the best plan. It would be unnecessary to have two
cars waiting about. Now, Miss Tuppence, my advice to you is to go and
have a good dinner, a really good one, mind. And don t think ahead
more than you can help.
He shook hands with them both, and a moment later they were outside.
Isn t he a duck? inquired Tuppence ecstatically, as she skipped down
the steps. Oh, Julius, isn t he just a duck?
Well, I allow he seems to be the goods all right. And I was wrong about
its being useless to go to him. Say, shall we go right away back to the
Ritz?
I must walk a bit, I think. I feel so excited. Drop me in the park,
will you? Unless you d like to come too?
I want to get some petrol, he explained. And send off a cable or
two.
All right. I ll meet you at the Ritz at seven. We ll have to dine
upstairs. I can t show myself in these glad rags.
Sure. I ll get Felix help me choose the menu. He s some head waiter,
that. So long.
Tuppence walked briskly along towards the Serpentine, first glancing at
her watch. It was nearly six o clock. She remembered that she had had no
tea, but felt too excited to be conscious of hunger. She walked as
far as Kensington Gardens and then slowly retraced her steps, feeling
infinitely better for the fresh air and exercise. It was not so easy to
follow Sir James s advice, and put the possible events of the evening
out of her head. As she drew nearer and nearer to Hyde Park corner, the
temptation to return to South Audley Mansions was almost irresistible.
At any rate, she decided, it would do no harm just to go and look
at the building. Perhaps, then, she could resign herself to waiting
patiently for ten o clock.
South Audley Mansions looked exactly the same as usual. What Tuppence
had expected she hardly knew, but the sight of its red brick stolidity
slightly assuaged the growing and entirely unreasonable uneasiness
that possessed her. She was just turning away when she heard a piercing
whistle, and the faithful Albert came running from the building to join
her.
Tuppence frowned. It was no part of the programme to have attention
called to her presence in the neighbourhood, but Albert was purple with
suppressed excitement.
I say, miss, she s a going!
Who s going? demanded Tuppence sharply.
The crook. Ready Rita. Mrs. Vandemeyer. She s a packing up, and she s
just sent down word for me to get her a taxi.
What? Tuppence clutched his arm.
It s the truth, miss. I thought maybe as you didn t know about it.
Albert, cried Tuppence, you re a brick. If it hadn t been for you
we d have lost her.
Albert flushed with pleasure at this tribute.
There s no time to lose, said Tuppence, crossing the road. I ve got
to stop her. At all costs I must keep her here until She broke off.
Albert, there s a telephone here, isn t there?
The boy shook his head.
The flats mostly have their own, miss. But there s a box just round the
corner.
Go to it then, at once, and ring up the Ritz Hotel . Ask for Mr.
Hersheimmer, and when you get him tell him to get Sir James and come on
at once, as Mrs. Vandemeyer is trying to hook it. If you can t get him,
ring up Sir James Peel Edgerton, you ll find his number in the book, and
tell him what s happening. You won t forget the names, will you?
Albert repeated them glibly. You trust to me, miss, it ll be all right.
But what about you? Aren t you afraid to trust yourself with her?
No, no, that s all right. But go and telephone . Be quick.
Drawing a long breath, Tuppence entered the Mansions and ran up to the
door of No. 20. How she was to detain Mrs. Vandemeyer until the two men
arrived, she did not know, but somehow or other it had to be done, and
she must accomplish the task single handed. What had occasioned this
precipitate departure? Did Mrs. Vandemeyer suspect her?
Speculations were idle. Tuppence pressed the bell firmly. She might
learn something from the cook.
Nothing happened and, after waiting some minutes, Tuppence pressed the
bell again, keeping her finger on the button for some little while.
At last she heard footsteps inside, and a moment later Mrs. Vandemeyer
herself opened the door. She lifted her eyebrows at the sight of the
girl.
You?
I had a touch of toothache, ma am, said Tuppence glibly. So thought
it better to come home and have a quiet evening.
Mrs. Vandemeyer said nothing, but she drew back and let Tuppence pass
into the hall.
How unfortunate for you, she said coldly. You had better go to bed.
Oh, I shall be all right in the kitchen, ma am. Cook will
Cook is out, said Mrs. Vandemeyer, in a rather disagreeable tone. I
sent her out. So you see you had better go to bed.
Suddenly Tuppence felt afraid. There was a ring in Mrs. Vandemeyer s
voice that she did not like at all. Also, the other woman was slowly
edging her up the passage. Tuppence turned at bay.
I don t want
Then, in a flash, a rim of cold steel touched her temple, and Mrs.
Vandemeyer s voice rose cold and menacing:
You damned little fool! Do you think I don t know? No, don t answer. If
you struggle or cry out, I ll shoot you like a dog.
The rim of steel pressed a little harder against the girl s temple.
Now then, march, went on Mrs. Vandemeyer. This way into my room. In
a minute, when I ve done with you, you ll go to bed as I told you to.
And you ll sleep oh yes, my little spy, you ll sleep all right!
There was a sort of hideous geniality in the last words which Tuppence
did not at all like. For the moment there was nothing to be done, and
she walked obediently into Mrs. Vandemeyer s bedroom. The pistol never
left her forehead. The room was in a state of wild disorder, clothes
were flung about right and left, a suit case and a hat box, half packed,
stood in the middle of the floor.
Tuppence pulled herself together with an effort. Her voice shook a
little, but she spoke out bravely.
Come now, she said. This is nonsense. You can t shoot me. Why, every
one in the building would hear the report.
I d risk that, said Mrs. Vandemeyer cheerfully. But, as long as you
don t sing out for help, you re all right and I don t think you will.
You re a clever girl. You deceived me all right. I hadn t a suspicion
of you! So I ve no doubt that you understand perfectly well that this
is where I m on top and you re underneath. Now then sit on the bed. Put
your hands above your head, and if you value your life don t move them.
Tuppence obeyed passively. Her good sense told her that there was
nothing else to do but accept the situation. If she shrieked for help
there was very little chance of anyone hearing her, whereas there was
probably quite a good chance of Mrs. Vandemeyer s shooting her. In the
meantime, every minute of delay gained was valuable.
Mrs. Vandemeyer laid down the revolver on the edge of the washstand
within reach of her hand, and, still eyeing Tuppence like a lynx in case
the girl should attempt to move, she took a little stoppered bottle from
its place on the marble and poured some of its contents into a glass
which she filled up with water.
What s that? asked Tuppence sharply.
Something to make you sleep soundly.
Tuppence paled a little.
Are you going to poison me? she asked in a whisper.
Perhaps, said Mrs. Vandemeyer, smiling agreeably.
Then I shan t drink it, said Tuppence firmly. I d much rather be
shot. At any rate that would make a row, and some one might hear it. But
I won t be killed off quietly like a lamb.
Mrs. Vandemeyer stamped her foot.
Don t be a little fool! Do you really think I want a hue and cry for
murder out after me? If you ve any sense at all, you ll realize that
poisoning you wouldn t suit my book at all. It s a sleeping draught,
that s all. You ll wake up to morrow morning none the worse. I simply
don t want the bother of tying you up and gagging you. That s the
alternative and you won t like it, I can tell you! I can be very rough
if I choose. So drink this down like a good girl, and you ll be none the
worse for it.
In her heart of hearts Tuppence believed her. The arguments she had
adduced rang true. It was a simple and effective method of getting her
out of the way for the time being. Nevertheless, the girl did not take
kindly to the idea of being tamely put to sleep without as much as one
bid for freedom. She felt that once Mrs. Vandemeyer gave them the slip,
the last hope of finding Tommy would be gone.
Tuppence was quick in her mental processes. All these reflections
passed through her mind in a flash, and she saw where a chance, a very
problematical chance, lay, and she determined to risk all in one supreme
effort.
Accordingly, she lurched suddenly off the bed and fell on her knees
before Mrs. Vandemeyer, clutching her skirts frantically.
I don t believe it, she moaned. It s poison I know it s poison.
Oh, don t make me drink it her voice rose to a shriek don t make me
drink it!
Mrs. Vandemeyer, glass in hand, looked down with a curling lip at this
sudden collapse.
Get up, you little idiot! Don t go on drivelling there. How you ever
had the nerve to play your part as you did I can t think. She stamped
her foot. Get up, I say.
But Tuppence continued to cling and sob, interjecting her sobs with
incoherent appeals for mercy. Every minute gained was to the good.
Moreover, as she grovelled, she moved imperceptibly nearer to her
objective.
Mrs. Vandemeyer gave a sharp impatient exclamation, and jerked the girl
to her knees.
Drink it at once! Imperiously she pressed the glass to the girl s
lips.
Tuppence gave one last despairing moan.
You swear it won t hurt me? she temporized.
Of course it won t hurt you. Don t be a fool.
Will you swear it?
Yes, yes, said the other impatiently. I swear it.
Tuppence raised a trembling left hand to the glass.
Very well. Her mouth opened meekly.
Mrs. Vandemeyer gave a sigh of relief, off her guard for the moment.
Then, quick as a flash, Tuppence jerked the glass upward as hard as she
could. The fluid in it splashed into Mrs. Vandemeyer s face, and during
her momentary gasp, Tuppence s right hand shot out and grasped the
revolver where it lay on the edge of the washstand. The next moment
she had sprung back a pace, and the revolver pointed straight at Mrs.
Vandemeyer s heart, with no unsteadiness in the hand that held it.
In the moment of victory, Tuppence betrayed a somewhat unsportsmanlike
triumph.
Now who s on top and who s underneath? she crowed.
The other s face was convulsed with rage. For a minute Tuppence thought
she was going to spring upon her, which would have placed the girl in an
unpleasant dilemma, since she meant to draw the line at actually letting
off the revolver. However, with an effort Mrs. Vandemeyer controlled
herself, and at last a slow evil smile crept over her face.
Not a fool, then, after all! You did that well, girl. But you shall pay
for it oh, yes, you shall pay for it! I have a long memory!
I m surprised you should have been gulled so easily, said Tuppence
scornfully. Did you really think I was the kind of girl to roll about
on the floor and whine for mercy?
You may do some day! said the other significantly.
The cold malignity of her manner sent an unpleasant chill down
Tuppence s spine, but she was not going to give in to it.
Supposing we sit down, she said pleasantly. Our present attitude is
a little melodramatic. No not on the bed. Draw a chair up to the table,
that s right. Now I ll sit opposite you with the revolver in front of
me just in case of accidents. Splendid. Now, let s talk.
What about? said Mrs. Vandemeyer sullenly.
Tuppence eyed her thoughtfully for a minute. She was remembering several
things. Boris s words, I believe you would sell us! and her
answer, The price would have to be enormous, given lightly, it was
true, yet might not there be a substratum of truth in it? Long ago,
had not Whittington asked: Who s been blabbing? Rita? Would Rita
Vandemeyer prove to be the weak spot in the armour of Mr. Brown?
Keeping her eyes fixed steadily on the other s face, Tuppence replied
quietly:
Money
Mrs. Vandemeyer started. Clearly, the reply was unexpected.
What do you mean?
I ll tell you. You said just now that you had a long memory. A long
memory isn t half as useful as a long purse! I dare say it relieves your
feelings a good deal to plan out all sorts of dreadful things to do to
me, but is that practical? Revenge is very unsatisfactory. Every one
always says so. But money Tuppence warmed to her pet creed well,
there s nothing unsatisfactory about money, is there?
Do you think, said Mrs. Vandemeyer scornfully, that I am the kind of
woman to sell my friends?
Yes, said Tuppence promptly. If the price was big enough.
A paltry hundred pounds or so!
No, said Tuppence. I should suggest a hundred thousand!
Her economical spirit did not permit her to mention the whole million
dollars suggested by Julius.
A flush crept over Mrs. Vandemeyer s face.
What did you say? she asked, her fingers playing nervously with a
brooch on her breast. In that moment Tuppence knew that the fish was
hooked, and for the first time she felt a horror of her own money loving
spirit. It gave her a dreadful sense of kinship to the woman fronting
her.
A hundred thousand pounds, repeated Tuppence.
The light died out of Mrs. Vandemeyer s eyes. She leaned back in her
chair.
Bah! she said. You haven t got it.
No, admitted Tuppence, I haven t but I know some one who has.
Who?
A friend of mine.
Must be a millionaire, remarked Mrs. Vandemeyer unbelievingly.
As a matter of fact he is. He s an American. He ll pay you that
without a murmur. You can take it from me that it s a perfectly genuine
proposition.
Mrs. Vandemeyer sat up again.
I m inclined to believe you, she said slowly.
There was silence between them for some time, then Mrs. Vandemeyer
looked up.
What does he want to know, this friend of yours?
Tuppence went through a momentary struggle, but it was Julius s money,
and his interests must come first.
He wants to know where Jane Finn is, she said boldly.
Mrs. Vandemeyer showed no surprise.
I m not sure where she is at the present moment, she replied.
But you could find out?
Oh, yes, returned Mrs. Vandemeyer carelessly. There would be no
difficulty about that.
Then Tuppence s voice shook a little there s a boy, a friend of
mine. I m afraid something s happened to him, through your pal Boris.
What s his name?
Tommy Beresford.
Never heard of him. But I ll ask Boris. He ll tell me anything he
knows.
Thank you. Tuppence felt a terrific rise in her spirits. It impelled
her to more audacious efforts. There s one thing more.
Well?
Tuppence leaned forward and lowered her voice.
Who is Mr. Brown?
Her quick eyes saw the sudden paling of the beautiful face. With an
effort Mrs. Vandemeyer pulled herself together and tried to resume her
former manner. But the attempt was a mere parody.
She shrugged her shoulders.
You can t have learnt much about us if you don t know that nobody
knows who Mr. Brown is ....
You do, said Tuppence quietly.
Again the colour deserted the other s face.
What makes you think that?
I don t know, said the girl truthfully. But I m sure.
Mrs. Vandemeyer stared in front of her for a long time.
Yes, she said hoarsely, at last, I know. I was beautiful, you
see very beautiful
You are still, said Tuppence with admiration.
Mrs. Vandemeyer shook her head. There was a strange gleam in her
electric blue eyes.
Not beautiful enough, she said in a soft dangerous voice.
Not beautiful enough! And sometimes, lately, I ve been afraid....
It s dangerous to know too much! She leaned forward across the table.
Swear that my name shan t be brought into it that no one shall ever
know.
I swear it. And, once s he caught, you ll be out of danger.
A terrified look swept across Mrs. Vandemeyer s face.
Shall I? Shall I ever be? She clutched Tuppence s arm. You re sure
about the money?
Quite sure.
When shall I have it? There must be no delay.
This friend of mine will be here presently. He may have to send cables,
or something like that. But there won t be any delay he s a terrific
hustler.
A resolute look settled on Mrs. Vandemeyer s face.
I ll do it. It s a great sum of money, and besides she gave a curious
smile it is not wise to throw over a woman like me!
For a moment or two, she remained smiling, and lightly tapping her
fingers on the table. Suddenly she started, and her face blanched.
What was that?
I heard nothing.
Mrs. Vandemeyer gazed round her fearfully.
If there should be some one listening
Nonsense. Who could there be?
Even the walls might have ears, whispered the other. I tell you I m
frightened. You don t know him!
Think of the hundred thousand pounds, said Tuppence soothingly.
Mrs. Vandemeyer passed her tongue over her dried lips.
You don t know him, she reiterated hoarsely. He s ah!
With a shriek of terror she sprang to her feet. Her outstretched hand
pointed over Tuppence s head. Then she swayed to the ground in a dead
faint.
Tuppence looked round to see what had startled her.
In the doorway were Sir James Peel Edgerton and Julius Hersheimmer.
CHAPTER XIII. THE VIGIL
SIR James brushed past Julius and hurriedly bent over the fallen woman.
Heart, he said sharply. Seeing us so suddenly must have given her a
shock. Brandy and quickly, or she ll slip through our fingers.
Julius hurried to the washstand.
Not there, said Tuppence over her shoulder. In the tantalus in the
dining room. Second door down the passage.
Between them Sir James and Tuppence lifted Mrs. Vandemeyer and carried
her to the bed. There they dashed water on her face, but with no result.
The lawyer fingered her pulse.
Touch and go, he muttered. I wish that young fellow would hurry up
with the brandy.
At that moment Julius re entered the room, carrying a glass half full of
the spirit which he handed to Sir James. While Tuppence lifted her head
the lawyer tried to force a little of the spirit between her closed
lips. Finally the woman opened her eyes feebly. Tuppence held the glass
to her lips.
Drink this.
Mrs. Vandemeyer complied. The brandy brought the colour back to her
white cheeks, and revived her in a marvellous fashion. She tried to sit
up then fell back with a groan, her hand to her side.
It s my heart, she whispered. I mustn t talk.
She lay back with closed eyes.
Sir James kept his finger on her wrist a minute longer, then withdrew it
with a nod.
She ll do now.
All three moved away, and stood together talking in low voices. One
and all were conscious of a certain feeling of anticlimax. Clearly any
scheme for cross questioning the lady was out of the question for the
moment. For the time being they were baffled, and could do nothing.
Tuppence related how Mrs. Vandemeyer had declared herself willing
to disclose the identity of Mr. Brown, and how she had consented to
discover and reveal to them the whereabouts of Jane Finn. Julius was
congratulatory.
That s all right, Miss Tuppence. Splendid! I guess that hundred
thousand pounds will look just as good in the morning to the lady as it
did over night. There s nothing to worry over. She won t speak without
the cash anyway, you bet!
There was certainly a good deal of common sense in this, and Tuppence
felt a little comforted.
What you say is true, said Sir James meditatively. I must confess,
however, that I cannot help wishing we had not interrupted at the minute
we did. Still, it cannot be helped, it is only a matter of waiting until
the morning.
He looked across at the inert figure on the bed. Mrs. Vandemeyer lay
perfectly passive with closed eyes. He shook his head.
Well, said Tuppence, with an attempt at cheerfulness, we must wait
until the morning, that s all. But I don t think we ought to leave the
flat.
What about leaving that bright boy of yours on guard?
Albert? And suppose she came round again and hooked it. Albert couldn t
stop her.
I guess she won t want to make tracks away from the dollars.
She might. She seemed very frightened of Mr. Brown.
What? Real plumb scared of him?
Yes. She looked round and said even walls had ears.
Maybe she meant a dictaphone, said Julius with interest.
Miss Tuppence is right, said Sir James quietly. We must not leave the
flat if only for Mrs. Vandemeyer s sake.
Julius stared at him.
You think he d get after her? Between now and to morrow morning. How
could he know, even?
You forget your own suggestion of a dictaphone, said Sir James dryly.
We have a very formidable adversary. I believe, if we exercise all due
care, that there is a very good chance of his being delivered into our
hands. But we must neglect no precaution. We have an important witness,
but she must be safeguarded. I would suggest that Miss Tuppence should
go to bed, and that you and I, Mr. Hersheimmer, should share the vigil.
Tuppence was about to protest, but happening to glance at the bed she
saw Mrs. Vandemeyer, her eyes half open, with such an expression of
mingled fear and malevolence on her face that it quite froze the words
on her lips.
For a moment she wondered whether the faint and the heart attack had
been a gigantic sham, but remembering the deadly pallor she could hardly
credit the supposition. As she looked the expression disappeared as by
magic, and Mrs. Vandemeyer lay inert and motionless as before. For a
moment the girl fancied she must have dreamt it. But she determined
nevertheless to be on the alert.
Well, said Julius, I guess we d better make a move out of here any
way.
The others fell in with his suggestion. Sir James again felt Mrs.
Vandemeyer s pulse.
Perfectly satisfactory, he said in a low voice to Tuppence. She ll be
absolutely all right after a night s rest.
The girl hesitated a moment by the bed. The intensity of the expression
she had surprised had impressed her powerfully. Mrs. Vandemeyer lifted
her lids. She seemed to be struggling to speak. Tuppence bent over her.
Don t leave she seemed unable to proceed, murmuring something
that sounded like sleepy. Then she tried again.
Tuppence bent lower still. It was only a breath.
Mr. Brown The voice stopped.
But the half closed eyes seemed still to send an agonized message.
Moved by a sudden impulse, the girl said quickly:
I shan t leave the flat. I shall sit up all night.
A flash of relief showed before the lids descended once more. Apparently
Mrs. Vandemeyer slept. But her words had awakened a new uneasiness in
Tuppence. What had she meant by that low murmur: Mr. Brown? Tuppence
caught herself nervously looking over her shoulder. The big wardrobe
loomed up in a sinister fashion before her eyes. Plenty of room for a
man to hide in that.... Half ashamed of herself, Tuppence pulled it open
and looked inside. No one of course! She stooped down and looked under
the bed. There was no other possible hiding place.
Tuppence gave her familiar shake of the shoulders. It was absurd, this
giving way to nerves! Slowly she went out of the room. Julius and Sir
James were talking in a low voice. Sir James turned to her.
Lock the door on the outside, please, Miss Tuppence, and take out the
key. There must be no chance of anyone entering that room.
The gravity of his manner impressed them, and Tuppence felt less ashamed
of her attack of nerves.
Say, remarked Julius suddenly, there s Tuppence s bright boy. I guess
I d better go down and ease his young mind. That s some lad, Tuppence.
How did you get in, by the way? asked Tuppence suddenly. I forgot to
ask.
Well, Albert got me on the phone all right. I ran round for Sir James
here, and we came right on. The boy was on the look out for us, and was
just a mite worried about what might have happened to you. He d been
listening outside the door of the flat, but couldn t hear anything.
Anyhow he suggested sending us up in the coal lift instead of ringing
the bell. And sure enough we landed in the scullery and came right along
to find you. Albert s still below, and must be just hopping mad by this
time. With which Julius departed abruptly.
Now then, Miss Tuppence, said Sir James, you know this place better
than I do. Where do you suggest we should take up our quarters?
Tuppence considered for a moment or two.
I think Mrs. Vandemeyer s boudoir would be the most comfortable, she
said at last, and led the way there.
Sir James looked round approvingly.
This will do very well, and now, my dear young lady, do go to bed and
get some sleep.
Tuppence shook her head resolutely.
I couldn t, thank you, Sir James. I should dream of Mr. Brown all
night!
But you ll be so tired, child.
No, I shan t. I d rather stay up really.
The lawyer gave in.
Julius reappeared some minutes later, having reassured Albert and
rewarded him lavishly for his services. Having in his turn failed to
persuade Tuppence to go to bed, he said decisively:
At any rate, you ve got to have something to eat right away. Where s
the larder?
Tuppence directed him, and he returned in a few minutes with a cold pie
and three plates.
After a hearty meal, the girl felt inclined to pooh pooh her fancies of
half an hour before. The power of the money bribe could not fail.
And now, Miss Tuppence, said Sir James, we want to hear your
adventures.
That s so, agreed Julius.
Tuppence narrated her adventures with some complacence. Julius
occasionally interjected an admiring Bully. Sir James said nothing
until she had finished, when his quiet well done, Miss Tuppence, made
her flush with pleasure.
There s one thing I don t get clearly, said Julius. What put her up
to clearing out?
I don t know, confessed Tuppence.
Sir James stroked his chin thoughtfully.
The room was in great disorder. That looks as though her flight was
unpremeditated. Almost as though she got a sudden warning to go from
some one.
Mr. Brown, I suppose, said Julius scoffingly.
The lawyer looked at him deliberately for a minute or two.
Why not? he said. Remember, you yourself have once been worsted by
him.
Julius flushed with vexation.
I feel just mad when I think of how I handed out Jane s photograph to
him like a lamb. Gee, if I ever lay hands on it again, I ll freeze on to
it like like hell!
That contingency is likely to be a remote one, said the other dryly.
I guess you re right, said Julius frankly. And, in any case, it s the
original I m out after. Where do you think she can be, Sir James?
The lawyer shook his head.
Impossible to say. But I ve a very good idea where she has been.
You have? Where?
Sir James smiled.
At the scene of your nocturnal adventures, the Bournemouth nursing
home.
There? Impossible. I asked.
No, my dear sir, you asked if anyone of the name of Jane Finn had been
there. Now, if the girl had been placed there it would almost certainly
be under an assumed name.
Bully for you, cried Julius. I never thought of that!
It was fairly obvious, said the other.
Perhaps the doctor s in it too, suggested Tuppence.
Julius shook his head.
I don t think so. I took to him at once. No, I m pretty sure Dr. Hall s
all right.
Hall, did you say? asked Sir James. That is curious really very
curious.
Why? demanded Tuppence.
Because I happened to meet him this morning. I ve known him slightly on
and off for some years, and this morning I ran across him in the street.
Staying at the M tropole , he told me. He turned to Julius. Didn t
he tell you he was coming up to town?
Julius shook his head.
Curious, mused Sir James. You did not mention his name this
afternoon, or I would have suggested your going to him for further
information with my card as introduction.
I guess I m a mutt, said Julius with unusual humility. I ought to
have thought of the false name stunt.
How could you think of anything after falling out of that tree? cried
Tuppence. I m sure anyone else would have been killed right off.
Well, I guess it doesn t matter now, anyway, said Julius. We ve got
Mrs. Vandemeyer on a string, and that s all we need.
Yes, said Tuppence, but there was a lack of assurance in her voice.
A silence settled down over the party. Little by little the magic of
the night began to gain a hold on them. There were sudden creaks of the
furniture, imperceptible rustlings in the curtains. Suddenly Tuppence
sprang up with a cry.
I can t help it. I know Mr. Brown s somewhere in the flat! I can feel
him.
Sure, Tuppence, how could he be? This door s open into the hall. No
one could have come in by the front door without our seeing and hearing
him.
I can t help it. I feel he s here!
She looked appealingly at Sir James, who replied gravely:
With due deference to your feelings, Miss Tuppence and mine as well
for that matter , I do not see how it is humanly possible for anyone to
be in the flat without our knowledge.
The girl was a little comforted by his words.
Sitting up at night is always rather jumpy, she confessed.
Yes, said Sir James. We are in the condition of people holding a
s ance. Perhaps if a medium were present we might get some marvellous
results.
Do you believe in spiritualism? asked Tuppence, opening her eyes wide.
The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.
There is some truth in it, without a doubt. But most of the testimony
would not pass muster in the witness box.
The hours drew on. With the first faint glimmerings of dawn, Sir James
drew aside the curtains. They beheld, what few Londoners see, the slow
rising of the sun over the sleeping city. Somehow, with the coming
of the light, the dreads and fancies of the past night seemed absurd.
Tuppence s spirits revived to the normal.
Hooray! she said. It s going to be a gorgeous day. And we shall find
Tommy. And Jane Finn. And everything will be lovely. I shall ask Mr.
Carter if I can t be made a Dame!
At seven o clock Tuppence volunteered to go and make some tea. She
returned with a tray, containing the teapot and four cups.
Who s the other cup for? inquired Julius.
The prisoner, of course. I suppose we might call her that?
Taking her tea seems a kind of anticlimax to last night, said Julius
thoughtfully.
Yes, it does, admitted Tuppence. But, anyway, here goes. Perhaps
you d both come, too, in case she springs on me, or anything. You see,
we don t know what mood she ll wake up in.
Sir James and Julius accompanied her to the door.
Where s the key? Oh, of course, I ve got it myself.
She put it in the lock, and turned it, then paused.
Supposing, after all, she s escaped? she murmured in a whisper.
Plumb impossible, replied Julius reassuringly.
But Sir James said nothing.
Tuppence drew a long breath and entered. She heaved a sigh of relief as
she saw that Mrs. Vandemeyer was lying on the bed.
Good morning, she remarked cheerfully. I ve brought you some tea.
Mrs. Vandemeyer did not reply. Tuppence put down the cup on the table
by the bed and went across to draw up the blinds. When she turned, Mrs.
Vandemeyer still lay without a movement. With a sudden fear clutching
at her heart, Tuppence ran to the bed. The hand she lifted was cold as
ice.... Mrs. Vandemeyer would never speak now....
Her cry brought the others. A very few minutes sufficed. Mrs. Vandemeyer
was dead must have been dead some hours. She had evidently died in her
sleep.
If that isn t the cruellest luck, cried Julius in despair.
The lawyer was calmer, but there was a curious gleam in his eyes.
If it is luck, he replied.
You don t think but, say, that s plumb impossible no one could have
got in.
No, admitted the lawyer. I don t see how they could. And yet she is
on the point of betraying Mr. Brown, and she dies. Is it only chance?
But how
Yes, how! That is what we must find out. He stood there silently,
gently stroking his chin. We must find out, he said quietly, and
Tuppence felt that if she was Mr. Brown she would not like the tone of
those simple words.
Julius s glance went to the window.
The window s open, he remarked. Do you think
Tuppence shook her head.
The balcony only goes along as far as the boudoir. We were there.
He might have slipped out suggested Julius.
But Sir James interrupted him.
Mr. Brown s methods are not so crude. In the meantime we must send for
a doctor, but before we do so, is there anything in this room that might
be of value to us?
Hastily, the three searched. A charred mass in the grate indicated
that Mrs. Vandemeyer had been burning papers on the eve of her flight.
Nothing of importance remained, though they searched the other rooms as
well.
There s that, said Tuppence suddenly, pointing to a small,
old fashioned safe let into the wall. It s for jewellery, I believe,
but there might be something else in it.
The key was in the lock, and Julius swung open the door, and searched
inside. He was some time over the task.
Well, said Tuppence impatiently.
There was a pause before Julius answered, then he withdrew his head and
shut to the door.
Nothing, he said.
In five minutes a brisk young doctor arrived, hastily summoned. He was
deferential to Sir James, whom he recognized.
Heart failure, or possibly an overdose of some sleeping draught. He
sniffed. Rather an odour of chloral in the air.
Tuppence remembered the glass she had upset. A new thought drove her to
the washstand. She found the little bottle from which Mrs. Vandemeyer
had poured a few drops.
It had been three parts full. Now it was empty .
CHAPTER XIV. A CONSULTATION
NOTHING was more surprising and bewildering to Tuppence than the ease
and simplicity with which everything was arranged, owing to Sir James s
skilful handling. The doctor accepted quite readily the theory that Mrs.
Vandemeyer had accidentally taken an overdose of chloral. He doubted
whether an inquest would be necessary. If so, he would let Sir James
know. He understood that Mrs. Vandemeyer was on the eve of departure for
abroad, and that the servants had already left? Sir James and his young
friends had been paying a call upon her, when she was suddenly stricken
down and they had spent the night in the flat, not liking to leave
her alone. Did they know of any relatives? They did not, but Sir James
referred him to Mrs. Vandemeyer s solicitor.
Shortly afterwards a nurse arrived to take charge, and the other left
the ill omened building.
And what now? asked Julius, with a gesture of despair. I guess we re
down and out for good.
Sir James stroked his chin thoughtfully.
No, he said quietly. There is still the chance that Dr. Hall may be
able to tell us something.
Gee! I d forgotten him.
The chance is slight, but it must not be neglected. I think I told you
that he is staying at the M tropole . I should suggest that we call
upon him there as soon as possible. Shall we say after a bath and
breakfast?
It was arranged that Tuppence and Julius should return to the Ritz ,
and call for Sir James in the car. This programme was faithfully carried
out, and a little after eleven they drew up before the M tropole .
They asked for Dr. Hall, and a page boy went in search of him. In a few
minutes the little doctor came hurrying towards them.
Can you spare us a few minutes, Dr. Hall? said Sir James pleasantly.
Let me introduce you to Miss Cowley. Mr. Hersheimmer, I think, you
already know.
A quizzical gleam came into the doctor s eye as he shook hands with
Julius.
Ah, yes, my young friend of the tree episode! Ankle all right, eh?
I guess it s cured owing to your skilful treatment, doc.
And the heart trouble? Ha ha!
Still searching, said Julius briefly.
To come to the point, can we have a word with you in private? asked
Sir James.
Certainly. I think there is a room here where we shall be quite
undisturbed.
He led the way, and the others followed him. They sat down, and the
doctor looked inquiringly at Sir James.
Dr. Hall, I am very anxious to find a certain young lady for the
purpose of obtaining a statement from her. I have reason to believe
that she has been at one time or another in your establishment at
Bournemouth. I hope I am transgressing no professional etiquette in
questioning you on the subject?
I suppose it is a matter of testimony?
Sir James hesitated a moment, then he replied:
Yes.
I shall be pleased to give you any information in my power. What is
the young lady s name? Mr. Hersheimmer asked me, I remember He half
turned to Julius.
The name, said Sir James bluntly, is really immaterial. She would be
almost certainly sent to you under an assumed one. But I should like to
know if you are acquainted with a Mrs. Vandemeyer?
Mrs. Vandemeyer, of 20 South Audley Mansions? I know her slightly.
You are not aware of what has happened?
What do you mean?
You do not know that Mrs. Vandemeyer is dead?
Dear, dear, I had no idea of it! When did it happen?
She took an overdose of chloral last night.
Purposely?
Accidentally, it is believed. I should not like to say myself. Anyway,
she was found dead this morning.
Very sad. A singularly handsome woman. I presume she was a friend of
yours, since you are acquainted with all these details.
I am acquainted with the details because well, it was I who found her
dead.
Indeed, said the doctor, starting.
Yes, said Sir James, and stroked his chin reflectively.
This is very sad news, but you will excuse me if I say that I do not
see how it bears on the subject of your inquiry?
It bears on it in this way, is it not a fact that Mrs. Vandemeyer
committed a young relative of hers to your charge?
Julius leaned forward eagerly.
That is the case, said the doctor quietly.
Under the name of ?
Janet Vandemeyer. I understood her to be a niece of Mrs. Vandemeyer s.
And she came to you?
As far as I can remember in June or July of 1915.
Was she a mental case?
She is perfectly sane, if that is what you mean. I understood from Mrs.
Vandemeyer that the girl had been with her on the Lusitania when
that ill fated ship was sunk, and had suffered a severe shock in
consequence.
We re on the right track, I think? Sir James looked round.
As I said before, I m a mutt! returned Julius.
The doctor looked at them all curiously.
You spoke of wanting a statement from her, he said. Supposing she is
not able to give one?
What? You have just said that she is perfectly sane.
So she is. Nevertheless, if you want a statement from her concerning
any events prior to May 7, 1915, she will not be able to give it to
you.
They looked at the little man, stupefied. He nodded cheerfully.
It s a pity, he said. A great pity, especially as I gather, Sir
James, that the matter is important. But there it is, she can tell you
nothing.
But why, man? Darn it all, why?
The little man shifted his benevolent glance to the excited young
American.
Because Janet Vandemeyer is suffering from a complete loss of memory.
What?
Quite so. An interesting case, a very interesting case. Not so
uncommon, really, as you would think. There are several very well known
parallels. It s the first case of the kind that I ve had under my own
personal observation, and I must admit that I ve found it of absorbing
interest. There was something rather ghoulish in the little man s
satisfaction.
And she remembers nothing, said Sir James slowly.
Nothing prior to May 7, 1915. After that date her memory is as good as
yours or mine.
Then the first thing she remembers?
Is landing with the survivors. Everything before that is a blank. She
did not know her own name, or where she had come from, or where she was.
She couldn t even speak her own tongue.
But surely all this is most unusual? put in Julius.
No, my dear sir. Quite normal under the circumstances. Severe shock to
the nervous system. Loss of memory proceeds nearly always on the same
lines. I suggested a specialist, of course. There s a very good man in
Paris makes a study of these cases but Mrs. Vandemeyer opposed the
idea of publicity that might result from such a course.
I can imagine she would, said Sir James grimly.
I fell in with her views. There is a certain notoriety given to these
cases. And the girl was very young nineteen, I believe. It seemed
a pity that her infirmity should be talked about might damage her
prospects. Besides, there is no special treatment to pursue in such
cases. It is really a matter of waiting.
Waiting?
Yes, sooner or later, the memory will return as suddenly as it
went. But in all probability the girl will have entirely forgotten the
intervening period, and will take up life where she left off at the
sinking of the Lusitania .
And when do you expect this to happen?
The doctor shrugged his shoulders.
Ah, that I cannot say. Sometimes it is a matter of months, sometimes
it has been known to be as long as twenty years! Sometimes another shock
does the trick. One restores what the other took away.
Another shock, eh? said Julius thoughtfully.
Exactly. There was a case in Colorado The little man s voice
trailed on, voluble, mildly enthusiastic.
Julius did not seem to be listening. He had relapsed into his own
thoughts and was frowning. Suddenly he came out of his brown study,
and hit the table such a resounding bang with his fist that every one
jumped, the doctor most of all.
I ve got it! I guess, doc, I d like your medical opinion on the plan
I m about to outline. Say Jane was to cross the herring pond again, and
the same thing was to happen. The submarine, the sinking ship, every one
to take to the boats and so on. Wouldn t that do the trick? Wouldn t it
give a mighty big bump to her subconscious self, or whatever the jargon
is, and start it functioning again right away?
A very interesting speculation, Mr. Hersheimmer. In my own opinion, it
would be successful. It is unfortunate that there is no chance of the
conditions repeating themselves as you suggest.
Not by nature, perhaps, doc. But I m talking about art.
Art?
Why, yes. What s the difficulty? Hire a liner
A liner! murmured Dr. Hall faintly.
Hire some passengers, hire a submarine that s the only difficulty, I
guess. Governments are apt to be a bit hide bound over their engines of
war. They won t sell to the first comer. Still, I guess that can be got
over. Ever heard of the word graft, sir? Well, graft gets there every
time! I reckon that we shan t really need to fire a torpedo. If every
one hustles round and screams loud enough that the ship is sinking, it
ought to be enough for an innocent young girl like Jane. By the time
she s got a life belt on her, and is being hustled into a boat, with
a well drilled lot of artistes doing the hysterical stunt on deck,
why she ought to be right back where she was in May, 1915. How s that
for the bare outline?
Dr. Hall looked at Julius. Everything that he was for the moment
incapable of saying was eloquent in that look.
No, said Julius, in answer to it, I m not crazy. The thing s
perfectly possible. It s done every day in the States for the movies.
Haven t you seen trains in collision on the screen? What s the
difference between buying up a train and buying up a liner? Get the
properties and you can go right ahead!
Dr. Hall found his voice.
But the expense, my dear sir. His voice rose. The expense! It will be
colossal!
Money doesn t worry me any, explained Julius simply.
Dr. Hall turned an appealing face to Sir James, who smiled slightly.
Mr. Hersheimmer is very well off very well off indeed.
The doctor s glance came back to Julius with a new and subtle quality in
it. This was no longer an eccentric young fellow with a habit of falling
off trees. The doctor s eyes held the deference accorded to a really
rich man.
Very remarkable plan. Very remarkable, he murmured. The movies of
course! Your American word for the kinema. Very interesting. I fear we
are perhaps a little behind the times over here in our methods. And you
really mean to carry out this remarkable plan of yours.
You bet your bottom dollar I do.
The doctor believed him which was a tribute to his nationality. If an
Englishman had suggested such a thing, he would have had grave doubts as
to his sanity.
I cannot guarantee a cure, he pointed out. Perhaps I ought to make
that quite clear.
Sure, that s all right, said Julius. You just trot out Jane, and
leave the rest to me.
Jane?
Miss Janet Vandemeyer, then. Can we get on the long distance to your
place right away, and ask them to send her up; or shall I run down and
fetch her in my car?
The doctor stared.
I beg your pardon, Mr. Hersheimmer. I thought you understood.
Understood what?
That Miss Vandemeyer is no longer under my care.
CHAPTER XV. TUPPENCE RECEIVES A PROPOSAL
JULIUS sprang up.
What?
I thought you were aware of that.
When did she leave?
Let me see. To day is Monday, is it not? It must have been last
Wednesday why, surely yes, it was the same evening that you er fell
out of my tree.
That evening? Before, or after?
Let me see oh yes, afterwards. A very urgent message arrived from Mrs.
Vandemeyer. The young lady and the nurse who was in charge of her left
by the night train.
Julius sank back again into his chair.
Nurse Edith left with a patient I remember, he muttered. My God, to
have been so near!
Dr. Hall looked bewildered.
I don t understand. Is the young lady not with her aunt, after all?
Tuppence shook her head. She was about to speak when a warning glance
from Sir James made her hold her tongue. The lawyer rose.
I m much obliged to you, Hall. We re very grateful for all you ve
told us. I m afraid we re now in the position of having to track Miss
Vandemeyer anew. What about the nurse who accompanied her; I suppose you
don t know where she is?
The doctor shook his head.
We ve not heard from her, as it happens. I understood she was to remain
with Miss Vandemeyer for a while. But what can have happened? Surely the
girl has not been kidnapped.
That remains to be seen, said Sir James gravely.
The other hesitated.
You do not think I ought to go to the police?
No, no. In all probability the young lady is with other relations.
The doctor was not completely satisfied, but he saw that Sir James was
determined to say no more, and realized that to try and extract
more information from the famous K.C. would be mere waste of labour.
Accordingly, he wished them goodbye, and they left the hotel. For a few
minutes they stood by the car talking.
How maddening, cried Tuppence. To think that Julius must have been
actually under the same roof with her for a few hours.
I was a darned idiot, muttered Julius gloomily.
You couldn t know, Tuppence consoled him. Could he? She appealed to
Sir James.
I should advise you not to worry, said the latter kindly. No use
crying over spilt milk, you know.
The great thing is what to do next, added Tuppence the practical.
Sir James shrugged his shoulders.
You might advertise for the nurse who accompanied the girl. That is
the only course I can suggest, and I must confess I do not hope for much
result. Otherwise there is nothing to be done.
Nothing? said Tuppence blankly. And Tommy?
We must hope for the best, said Sir James. Oh yes, we must go on
hoping.
But over her downcast head his eyes met Julius s, and almost
imperceptibly he shook his head. Julius understood. The lawyer
considered the case hopeless. The young American s face grew grave. Sir
James took Tuppence s hand.
You must let me know if anything further comes to light. Letters will
always be forwarded.
Tuppence stared at him blankly.
You are going away?
I told you. Don t you remember? To Scotland.
Yes, but I thought The girl hesitated.
Sir James shrugged his shoulders.
My dear young lady, I can do nothing more, I fear. Our clues have all
ended in thin air. You can take my word for it that there is nothing
more to be done. If anything should arise, I shall be glad to advise you
in any way I can.
His words gave Tuppence an extraordinarily desolate feeling.
I suppose you re right, she said. Anyway, thank you very much for
trying to help us. Good bye.
Julius was bending over the car. A momentary pity came into Sir James s
keen eyes, as he gazed into the girl s downcast face.
Don t be too disconsolate, Miss Tuppence, he said in a low voice.
Remember, holiday time isn t always all playtime. One sometimes manages
to put in some work as well.
Something in his tone made Tuppence glance up sharply. He shook his head
with a smile.
No, I shan t say any more. Great mistake to say too much. Remember
that. Never tell all you know not even to the person you know best.
Understand? Good bye.
He strode away. Tuppence stared after him. She was beginning to
understand Sir James s methods. Once before he had thrown her a hint
in the same careless fashion. Was this a hint? What exactly lay
behind those last brief words? Did he mean that, after all, he had not
abandoned the case; that, secretly, he would be working on it still
while
Her meditations were interrupted by Julius, who adjured her to get
right in.
You re looking kind of thoughtful, he remarked as they started off.
Did the old guy say anything more?
Tuppence opened her mouth impulsively, and then shut it again. Sir
James s words sounded in her ears: Never tell all you know not even
to the person you know best. And like a flash there came into her mind
another memory. Julius before the safe in the flat, her own question and
the pause before his reply, Nothing. Was there really nothing? Or
had he found something he wished to keep to himself? If he could make a
reservation, so could she.
Nothing particular, she replied.
She felt rather than saw Julius throw a sideways glance at her.
Say, shall we go for a spin in the park?
If you like.
For a while they ran on under the trees in silence. It was a beautiful
day. The keen rush through the air brought a new exhilaration to
Tuppence.
Say, Miss Tuppence, do you think I m ever going to find Jane?
Julius spoke in a discouraged voice. The mood was so alien to him that
Tuppence turned and stared at him in surprise. He nodded.
That s so. I m getting down and out over the business. Sir James to day
hadn t got any hope at all, I could see that. I don t like him we don t
gee together somehow but he s pretty cute, and I guess he wouldn t quit
if there was any chance of success now, would he?
Tuppence felt rather uncomfortable, but clinging to her belief that
Julius also had withheld something from her, she remained firm.
He suggested advertising for the nurse, she reminded him.
Yes, with a forlorn hope flavour to his voice! No I m about fed up.
I ve half a mind to go back to the States right away.
Oh no! cried Tuppence. We ve got to find Tommy.
I sure forgot Beresford, said Julius contritely. That s so. We must
find him. But after well, I ve been day dreaming ever since I started
on this trip and these dreams are rotten poor business. I m quit of
them. Say, Miss Tuppence, there s something I d like to ask you.
Yes?
You and Beresford. What about it?
I don t understand you, replied Tuppence with dignity, adding rather
inconsequently: And, anyway, you re wrong!
Not got a sort of kindly feeling for one another?
Certainly not, said Tuppence with warmth. Tommy and I are
friends nothing more.
I guess every pair of lovers has said that sometime or another,
observed Julius.
Nonsense! snapped Tuppence. Do I look the sort of girl that s always
falling in love with every man she meets?
You do not. You look the sort of girl that s mighty often getting
fallen in love with!
Oh! said Tuppence, rather taken aback. That s a compliment, I
suppose?
Sure. Now let s get down to this. Supposing we never find Beresford
and and
All right say it! I can face facts. Supposing he s dead! Well?
And all this business fiddles out. What are you going to do?
I don t know, said Tuppence forlornly.
You ll be darned lonesome, you poor kid.
I shall be all right, snapped Tuppence with her usual resentment of
any kind of pity.
What about marriage? inquired Julius. Got any views on the subject?
I intend to marry, of course, replied Tuppence. That is, if she
paused, knew a momentary longing to draw back, and then stuck to her
guns bravely I can find some one rich enough to make it worth my
while. That s frank, isn t it? I dare say you despise me for it.
I never despise business instinct, said Julius. What particular
figure have you in mind?
Figure? asked Tuppence, puzzled. Do you mean tall or short?
No. Sum income.
Oh, I I haven t quite worked that out.
What about me?
You?
Sure thing.
Oh, I couldn t!
Why not?
I tell you I couldn t.
Again, why not?
It would seem so unfair.
I don t see anything unfair about it. I call your bluff, that s all. I
admire you immensely, Miss Tuppence, more than any girl I ve ever met.
You re so darned plucky. I d just love to give you a real, rattling good
time. Say the word, and we ll run round right away to some high class
jeweller, and fix up the ring business.
I can t, gasped Tuppence.
Because of Beresford?
No, no, no!
Well then?
Tuppence merely continued to shake her head violently.
You can t reasonably expect more dollars than I ve got.
Oh, it isn t that, gasped Tuppence with an almost hysterical laugh.
But thanking you very much, and all that, I think I d better say no.
I d be obliged if you d do me the favour to think it over until
to morrow.
It s no use.
Still, I guess we ll leave it like that.
Very well, said Tuppence meekly.
Neither of them spoke again until they reached the Ritz .
Tuppence went upstairs to her room. She felt morally battered to the
ground after her conflict with Julius s vigorous personality. Sitting
down in front of the glass, she stared at her own reflection for some
minutes.
Fool, murmured Tuppence at length, making a grimace. Little fool.
Everything you want everything you ve ever hoped for, and you go and
bleat out no like an idiotic little sheep. It s your one chance. Why
don t you take it? Grab it? Snatch at it? What more do you want?
As if in answer to her own question, her eyes fell on a small snapshot
of Tommy that stood on her dressing table in a shabby frame. For a
moment she struggled for self control, and then abandoning all presence,
she held it to her lips and burst into a fit of sobbing.
Oh, Tommy, Tommy, she cried, I do love you so and I may never see
you again....
At the end of five minutes Tuppence sat up, blew her nose, and pushed
back her hair.
That s that, she observed sternly. Let s look facts in the face. I
seem to have fallen in love with an idiot of a boy who probably doesn t
care two straws about me. Here she paused. Anyway, she resumed, as
though arguing with an unseen opponent, I don t know that he does.
He d never have dared to say so. I ve always jumped on sentiment and
here I am being more sentimental than anybody. What idiots girls are!
I ve always thought so. I suppose I shall sleep with his photograph
under my pillow, and dream about him all night. It s dreadful to feel
you ve been false to your principles.
Tuppence shook her head sadly, as she reviewed her backsliding.
I don t know what to say to Julius, I m sure. Oh, what a fool I feel!
I ll have to say something he s so American and thorough, he ll
insist upon having a reason. I wonder if he did find anything in that
safe
Tuppence s meditations went off on another tack. She reviewed the events
of last night carefully and persistently. Somehow, they seemed bound up
with Sir James s enigmatical words....
Suddenly she gave a great start the colour faded out of her face. Her
eyes, fascinated, gazed in front of her, the pupils dilated.
Impossible, she murmured. Impossible! I must be going mad even to
think of such a thing....
Monstrous yet it explained everything....
After a moment s reflection she sat down and wrote a note, weighing each
word as she did so. Finally she nodded her head as though satisfied, and
slipped it into an envelope which she addressed to Julius. She went
down the passage to his sitting room and knocked at the door. As she had
expected, the room was empty. She left the note on the table.
A small page boy was waiting outside her own door when she returned to
it.
Telegram for you, miss.
Tuppence took it from the salver, and tore it open carelessly. Then she
gave a cry. The telegram was from Tommy!
CHAPTER XVI. FURTHER ADVENTURES OF TOMMY
FROM a darkness punctuated with throbbing stabs of fire, Tommy dragged
his senses slowly back to life. When he at last opened his eyes, he was
conscious of nothing but an excruciating pain through his temples. He
was vaguely aware of unfamiliar surroundings. Where was he? What had
happened? He blinked feebly. This was not his bedroom at the Ritz . And
what the devil was the matter with his head?
Damn! said Tommy, and tried to sit up. He had remembered. He was in
that sinister house in Soho. He uttered a groan and fell back. Through
his almost closed lids he reconnoitred carefully.
He is coming to, remarked a voice very near Tommy s ear. He recognized
it at once for that of the bearded and efficient German, and lay
artistically inert. He felt that it would be a pity to come round too
soon; and until the pain in his head became a little less acute, he felt
quite incapable of collecting his wits. Painfully he tried to puzzle out
what had happened. Obviously somebody must have crept up behind him as
he listened and struck him down with a blow on the head. They knew
him now for a spy, and would in all probability give him short shrift.
Undoubtedly he was in a tight place. Nobody knew where he was, therefore
he need expect no outside assistance, and must depend solely on his own
wits.
Well, here goes, murmured Tommy to himself, and repeated his former
remark.
Damn! he observed, and this time succeeded in sitting up.
In a minute the German stepped forward and placed a glass to his lips,
with the brief command Drink. Tommy obeyed. The potency of the draught
made him choke, but it cleared his brain in a marvellous manner.
He was lying on a couch in the room in which the meeting had been held.
On one side of him was the German, on the other the villainous faced
doorkeeper who had let him in. The others were grouped together at a
little distance away. But Tommy missed one face. The man known as Number
One was no longer of the company.
Feel better? asked the German, as he removed the empty glass.
Yes, thanks, returned Tommy cheerfully.
Ah, my young friend, it is lucky for you your skull is so thick. The
good Conrad struck hard. He indicated the evil faced doorkeeper by a
nod. The man grinned.
Tommy twisted his head round with an effort.
Oh, he said, so you re Conrad, are you? It strikes me the thickness
of my skull was lucky for you too. When I look at you I feel it s almost
a pity I ve enabled you to cheat the hangman.
The man snarled, and the bearded man said quietly:
He would have run no risk of that.
Just as you like, replied Tommy. I know it s the fashion to run down
the police. I rather believe in them myself.
His manner was nonchalant to the last degree. Tommy Beresford was one
of those young Englishmen not distinguished by any special intellectual
ability, but who are emphatically at their best in what is known as a
tight place. Their natural diffidence and caution fall from them like
a glove. Tommy realized perfectly that in his own wits lay the only
chance of escape, and behind his casual manner he was racking his brains
furiously.
The cold accents of the German took up the conversation:
Have you anything to say before you are put to death as a spy?
Simply lots of things, replied Tommy with the same urbanity as before.
Do you deny that you were listening at that door?
I do not. I must really apologize but your conversation was so
interesting that it overcame my scruples.
How did you get in?
Dear old Conrad here. Tommy smiled deprecatingly at him. I hesitate
to suggest pensioning off a faithful servant, but you really ought to
have a better watchdog.
Conrad snarled impotently, and said sullenly, as the man with the beard
swung round upon him:
He gave the word. How was I to know?
Yes, Tommy chimed in. How was he to know? Don t blame the poor
fellow. His hasty action has given me the pleasure of seeing you all
face to face.
He fancied that his words caused some discomposure among the group, but
the watchful German stilled it with a wave of his hand.
Dead men tell no tales, he said evenly.
Ah, said Tommy, but I m not dead yet!
You soon will be, my young friend, said the German.
An assenting murmur came from the others.
Tommy s heart beat faster, but his casual pleasantness did not waver.
I think not, he said firmly. I should have a great objection to
dying.
He had got them puzzled, he saw that by the look on his captor s face.
Can you give us any reason why we should not put you to death? asked
the German.
Several, replied Tommy. Look here, you ve been asking me a lot of
questions. Let me ask you one for a change. Why didn t you kill me off
at once before I regained consciousness?
The German hesitated, and Tommy seized his advantage.
Because you didn t know how much I knew and where I obtained that
knowledge. If you kill me now, you never will know.
But here the emotions of Boris became too much for him. He stepped
forward waving his arms.
You hell hound of a spy, he screamed. We will give you short shrift.
Kill him! Kill him!
There was a roar of applause.
You hear? said the German, his eyes on Tommy. What have you to say to
that?
Say? Tommy shrugged his shoulders. Pack of fools. Let them ask
themselves a few questions. How did I get into this place? Remember what
dear old Conrad said with your own password , wasn t it? How did I
get hold of that? You don t suppose I came up those steps haphazard and
said the first thing that came into my head?
Tommy was pleased with the concluding words of this speech. His only
regret was that Tuppence was not present to appreciate its full flavour.
That is true, said the working man suddenly. Comrades, we have been
betrayed!
An ugly murmur arose. Tommy smiled at them encouragingly.
That s better. How can you hope to make a success of any job if you
don t use your brains?
You will tell us who has betrayed us, said the German. But that shall
not save you oh, no! You shall tell us all that you know. Boris, here,
knows pretty ways of making people speak!
Bah! said Tommy scornfully, fighting down a singularly unpleasant
feeling in the pit of his stomach. You will neither torture me nor kill
me.
And why not? asked Boris.
Because you d kill the goose that lays the golden eggs, replied Tommy
quietly.
There was a momentary pause. It seemed as though Tommy s persistent
assurance was at last conquering. They were no longer completely sure of
themselves. The man in the shabby clothes stared at Tommy searchingly.
He s bluffing you, Boris, he said quietly.
Tommy hated him. Had the man seen through him?
The German, with an effort, turned roughly to Tommy.
What do you mean?
What do you think I mean? parried Tommy, searching desperately in his
own mind.
Suddenly Boris stepped forward, and shook his fist in Tommy s face.
Speak, you swine of an Englishman speak!
Don t get so excited, my good fellow, said Tommy calmly. That s the
worst of you foreigners. You can t keep calm. Now, I ask you, do I look
as though I thought there were the least chance of your killing me?
He looked confidently round, and was glad they could not hear the
persistent beating of his heart which gave the lie to his words.
No, admitted Boris at last sullenly, you do not.
Thank God, he s not a mind reader, thought Tommy. Aloud he pursued his
advantage:
And why am I so confident? Because I know something that puts me in a
position to propose a bargain.
A bargain? The bearded man took him up sharply.
Yes a bargain. My life and liberty against He paused.
Against what?
The group pressed forward. You could have heard a pin drop.
Slowly Tommy spoke.
The papers that Danvers brought over from America in the Lusitania .
The effect of his words was electrical. Every one was on his feet.
The German waved them back. He leaned over Tommy, his face purple with
excitement.
Himmel! You have got them, then?
With magnificent calm Tommy shook his head.
You know where they are? persisted the German.
Again Tommy shook his head. Not in the least.
Then then angry and baffled, the words failed him.
Tommy looked round. He saw anger and bewilderment on every face, but his
calm assurance had done its work no one doubted but that something lay
behind his words.
I don t know where the papers are but I believe that I can find them.
I have a theory
Pah!
Tommy raised his hand, and silenced the clamours of disgust.
I call it a theory but I m pretty sure of my facts facts that are
known to no one but myself. In any case what do you lose? If I can
produce the papers you give me my life and liberty in exchange. Is it a
bargain?
And if we refuse? said the German quietly.
Tommy lay back on the couch.
The 29th, he said thoughtfully, is less than a fortnight ahead
For a moment the German hesitated. Then he made a sign to Conrad.
Take him into the other room.
For five minutes, Tommy sat on the bed in the dingy room next door. His
heart was beating violently. He had risked all on this throw. How would
they decide? And all the while that this agonized questioning went on
within him, he talked flippantly to Conrad, enraging the cross grained
doorkeeper to the point of homicidal mania.
At last the door opened, and the German called imperiously to Conrad to
return.
Let s hope the judge hasn t put his black cap on, remarked Tommy
frivolously. That s right, Conrad, march me in. The prisoner is at the
bar, gentlemen.
The German was seated once more behind the table. He motioned to Tommy
to sit down opposite to him.
We accept, he said harshly, on terms. The papers must be delivered to
us before you go free.
Idiot! said Tommy amiably. How do you think I can look for them if
you keep me tied by the leg here?
What do you expect, then?
I must have liberty to go about the business in my own way.
The German laughed.
Do you think we are little children to let you walk out of here leaving
us a pretty story full of promises?
No, said Tommy thoughtfully. Though infinitely simpler for me, I
did not really think you would agree to that plan. Very well, we must
arrange a compromise. How would it be if you attached little Conrad here
to my person. He s a faithful fellow, and very ready with the fist.
We prefer, said the German coldly, that you should remain here.
One of our number will carry out your instructions minutely. If the
operations are complicated, he will return to you with a report and you
can instruct him further.
You re tying my hands, complained Tommy. It s a very delicate affair,
and the other fellow will muff it up as likely as not, and then where
shall I be? I don t believe one of you has got an ounce of tact.
The German rapped the table.
Those are our terms. Otherwise, death!
Tommy leaned back wearily.
I like your style. Curt, but attractive. So be it, then. But one thing
is essential, I must see the girl.
What girl?
Jane Finn, of course.
The other looked at him curiously for some minutes, then he said slowly,
and as though choosing his words with care:
Do you not know that she can tell you nothing?
Tommy s heart beat a little faster. Would he succeed in coming face to
face with the girl he was seeking?
I shall not ask her to tell me anything, he said quietly. Not in so
many words, that is.
Then why see her?
Tommy paused.
To watch her face when I ask her one question, he replied at last.
Again there was a look in the German s eyes that Tommy did not quite
understand.
She will not be able to answer your question.
That does not matter. I shall have seen her face when I ask it.
And you think that will tell you anything? He gave a short
disagreeable laugh. More than ever, Tommy felt that there was a
factor somewhere that he did not understand. The German looked at
him searchingly. I wonder whether, after all, you know as much as we
think? he said softly.
Tommy felt his ascendancy less sure than a moment before. His hold had
slipped a little. But he was puzzled. What had he said wrong? He spoke
out on the impulse of the moment.
There may be things that you know which I do not. I have not pretended
to be aware of all the details of your show. But equally I ve got
something up my sleeve that you don t know about. And that s where I
mean to score. Danvers was a damned clever fellow He broke off as
if he had said too much.
But the German s face had lightened a little.
Danvers, he murmured. I see He paused a minute, then waved to
Conrad. Take him away. Upstairs you know.
Wait a minute, said Tommy. What about the girl?
That may perhaps be arranged.
It must be.
We will see about it. Only one person can decide that.
Who? asked Tommy. But he knew the answer.
Mr. Brown
Shall I see him?
Perhaps.
Come, said Conrad harshly.
Tommy rose obediently. Outside the door his gaoler motioned to him to
mount the stairs. He himself followed close behind. On the floor above
Conrad opened a door and Tommy passed into a small room. Conrad lit a
hissing gas burner and went out. Tommy heard the sound of the key being
turned in the lock.
He set to work to examine his prison. It was a smaller room than the
one downstairs, and there was something peculiarly airless about the
atmosphere of it. Then he realized that there was no window. He walked
round it. The walls were filthily dirty, as everywhere else. Four
pictures hung crookedly on the wall representing scenes from Faust.
Marguerite with her box of jewels, the church scene, Siebel and his
flowers, and Faust and Mephistopheles. The latter brought Tommy s mind
back to Mr. Brown again. In this sealed and closed chamber, with its
close fitting heavy door, he felt cut off from the world, and the
sinister power of the arch criminal seemed more real. Shout as he would,
no one could ever hear him. The place was a living tomb....
With an effort Tommy pulled himself together. He sank on to the bed
and gave himself up to reflection. His head ached badly; also, he was
hungry. The silence of the place was dispiriting.
Anyway, said Tommy, trying to cheer himself, I shall see the
chief the mysterious Mr. Brown and with a bit of luck in bluffing I
shall see the mysterious Jane Finn also. After that
After that Tommy was forced to admit the prospect looked dreary.
CHAPTER XVII. ANNETTE
THE troubles of the future, however, soon faded before the troubles of
the present. And of these, the most immediate and pressing was that of
hunger. Tommy had a healthy and vigorous appetite. The steak and
chips partaken of for lunch seemed now to belong to another decade. He
regretfully recognized the fact that he would not make a success of a
hunger strike.
He prowled aimlessly about his prison. Once or twice he discarded
dignity, and pounded on the door. But nobody answered the summons.
Hang it all! said Tommy indignantly. They can t mean to starve me
to death. A new born fear passed through his mind that this might,
perhaps, be one of those pretty ways of making a prisoner speak, which
had been attributed to Boris. But on reflection he dismissed the idea.
It s that sour faced brute Conrad, he decided. That s a fellow I
shall enjoy getting even with one of these days. This is just a bit of
spite on his part. I m certain of it.
Further meditations induced in him the feeling that it would be
extremely pleasant to bring something down with a whack on Conrad s
egg shaped head. Tommy stroked his own head tenderly, and gave himself
up to the pleasures of imagination. Finally a bright idea flashed
across his brain. Why not convert imagination into reality? Conrad
was undoubtedly the tenant of the house. The others, with the possible
exception of the bearded German, merely used it as a rendezvous.
Therefore, why not wait in ambush for Conrad behind the door, and when
he entered bring down a chair, or one of the decrepit pictures, smartly
on to his head. One would, of course, be careful not to hit too hard.
And then and then, simply walk out! If he met anyone on the way down,
well Tommy brightened at the thought of an encounter with his fists.
Such an affair was infinitely more in his line than the verbal encounter
of this afternoon. Intoxicated by his plan, Tommy gently unhooked the
picture of the Devil and Faust, and settled himself in position. His
hopes were high. The plan seemed to him simple but excellent.
Time went on, but Conrad did not appear. Night and day were the same
in this prison room, but Tommy s wrist watch, which enjoyed a certain
degree of accuracy, informed him that it was nine o clock in the
evening. Tommy reflected gloomily that if supper did not arrive soon
it would be a question of waiting for breakfast. At ten o clock hope
deserted him, and he flung himself on the bed to seek consolation in
sleep. In five minutes his woes were forgotten.
The sound of the key turning in the lock awoke him from his slumbers.
Not belonging to the type of hero who is famous for awaking in full
possession of his faculties, Tommy merely blinked at the ceiling and
wondered vaguely where he was. Then he remembered, and looked at his
watch. It was eight o clock.
It s either early morning tea or breakfast, deduced the young man,
and pray God it s the latter!
The door swung open. Too late, Tommy remembered his scheme of
obliterating the unprepossessing Conrad. A moment later he was glad that
he had, for it was not Conrad who entered, but a girl. She carried a
tray which she set down on the table.
In the feeble light of the gas burner Tommy blinked at her. He decided
at once that she was one of the most beautiful girls he had ever seen.
Her hair was a full rich brown, with sudden glints of gold in it as
though there were imprisoned sunbeams struggling in its depths. There
was a wild rose quality about her face. Her eyes, set wide apart, were
hazel, a golden hazel that again recalled a memory of sunbeams.
A delirious thought shot through Tommy s mind.
Are you Jane Finn? he asked breathlessly.
The girl shook her head wonderingly.
My name is Annette, monsieur.
She spoke in a soft, broken English.
Oh! said Tommy, rather taken aback. Fran aise? he hazarded.
Oui, monsieur. Monsieur parle fran ais?
Not for any length of time, said Tommy. What s that? Breakfast?
The girl nodded. Tommy dropped off the bed and came and inspected the
contents of the tray. It consisted of a loaf, some margarine, and a jug
of coffee.
The living is not equal to the Ritz , he observed with a sigh. But
for what we are at last about to receive the Lord has made me truly
thankful. Amen.
He drew up a chair, and the girl turned away to the door.
Wait a sec, cried Tommy. There are lots of things I want to ask you,
Annette. What are you doing in this house? Don t tell me you re Conrad s
niece, or daughter, or anything, because I can t believe it.
I do the service , monsieur. I am not related to anybody.
I see, said Tommy. You know what I asked you just now. Have you ever
heard that name?
I have heard people speak of Jane Finn, I think.
You don t know where she is?
Annette shook her head.
She s not in this house, for instance?
Oh no, monsieur. I must go now they will be waiting for me.
She hurried out. The key turned in the lock.
I wonder who they are, mused Tommy, as he continued to make inroads
on the loaf. With a bit of luck, that girl might help me to get out of
here. She doesn t look like one of the gang.
At one o clock Annette reappeared with another tray, but this time
Conrad accompanied her.
Good morning, said Tommy amiably. You have not used Pear s soap, I
see.
Conrad growled threateningly.
No light repartee, have you, old bean? There, there, we can t always
have brains as well as beauty. What have we for lunch? Stew? How did I
know? Elementary, my dear Watson the smell of onions is unmistakable.
Talk away, grunted the man. It s little enough time you ll have to
talk in, maybe.
The remark was unpleasant in its suggestion, but Tommy ignored it. He
sat down at the table.
Retire, varlet, he said, with a wave of his hand. Prate not to thy
betters.
That evening Tommy sat on the bed, and cogitated deeply. Would Conrad
again accompany the girl? If he did not, should he risk trying to make
an ally of her? He decided that he must leave no stone unturned. His
position was desperate.
At eight o clock the familiar sound of the key turning made him spring
to his feet. The girl was alone.
Shut the door, he commanded. I want to speak to you. She obeyed.
Look here, Annette, I want you to help me get out of this. She shook
her head.
Impossible. There are three of them on the floor below.
Oh! Tommy was secretly grateful for the information. But you would
help me if you could?
No, monsieur.
Why not?
The girl hesitated.
I think they are my own people. You have spied upon them. They are
quite right to keep you here.
They re a bad lot, Annette. If you ll help me, I ll take you away from
the lot of them. And you d probably get a good whack of money.
But the girl merely shook her head.
I dare not, monsieur; I am afraid of them.
She turned away.
Wouldn t you do anything to help another girl? cried Tommy. She s
about your age too. Won t you save her from their clutches?
You mean Jane Finn?
Yes.
It is her you came here to look for? Yes?
That s it.
The girl looked at him, then passed her hand across her forehead.
Jane Finn. Always I hear that name. It is familiar.
Tommy came forward eagerly.
You must know something about her?
But the girl turned away abruptly.
I know nothing only the name. She walked towards the door. Suddenly
she uttered a cry. Tommy stared. She had caught sight of the picture
he had laid against the wall the night before. For a moment he caught a
look of terror in her eyes. As inexplicably it changed to relief. Then
abruptly she went out of the room. Tommy could make nothing of it. Did
she fancy that he had meant to attack her with it? Surely not. He rehung
the picture on the wall thoughtfully.
Three more days went by in dreary inaction. Tommy felt the strain
telling on his nerves. He saw no one but Conrad and Annette, and the
girl had become dumb. She spoke only in monosyllables. A kind of dark
suspicion smouldered in her eyes. Tommy felt that if this solitary
confinement went on much longer he would go mad. He gathered from Conrad
that they were waiting for orders from Mr. Brown. Perhaps, thought
Tommy, he was abroad or away, and they were obliged to wait for his
return.
But the evening of the third day brought a rude awakening.
It was barely seven o clock when he heard the tramp of footsteps outside
in the passage. In another minute the door was flung open. Conrad
entered. With him was the evil looking Number 14. Tommy s heart sank at
the sight of them.
Evenin , gov nor, said the man with a leer. Got those ropes, mate?
The silent Conrad produced a length of fine cord. The next minute Number
14 s hands, horribly dexterous, were winding the cord round his limbs,
while Conrad held him down.
What the devil ? began Tommy.
But the slow, speechless grin of the silent Conrad froze the words on
his lips.
Number 14 proceeded deftly with his task. In another minute Tommy was a
mere helpless bundle. Then at last Conrad spoke:
Thought you d bluffed us, did you? With what you knew, and what you
didn t know. Bargained with us! And all the time it was bluff! Bluff!
You know less than a kitten. But your number s up now all right, you
b swine.
Tommy lay silent. There was nothing to say. He had failed. Somehow
or other the omnipotent Mr. Brown had seen through his pretensions.
Suddenly a thought occurred to him.
A very good speech, Conrad, he said approvingly. But wherefore the
bonds and fetters? Why not let this kind gentleman here cut my throat
without delay?
Garn, said Number 14 unexpectedly. Think we re as green as to do you
in here, and have the police nosing round? Not alf! We ve ordered the
carriage for your lordship to morrow mornin , but in the meantime we re
not taking any chances, see!
Nothing, said Tommy, could be plainer than your words unless it was
your face.
Stow it, said Number 14.
With pleasure, replied Tommy. You re making a sad mistake but yours
will be the loss.
You don t kid us that way again, said Number 14. Talking as though
you were still at the blooming Ritz , aren t you?
Tommy made no reply. He was engaged in wondering how Mr. Brown had
discovered his identity. He decided that Tuppence, in the throes of
anxiety, had gone to the police, and that his disappearance having been
made public the gang had not been slow to put two and two together.
The two men departed and the door slammed. Tommy was left to his
meditations. They were not pleasant ones. Already his limbs felt cramped
and stiff. He was utterly helpless, and he could see no hope anywhere.
About an hour had passed when he heard the key softly turned, and the
door opened. It was Annette. Tommy s heart beat a little faster. He had
forgotten the girl. Was it possible that she had come to his help?
Suddenly he heard Conrad s voice:
Come out of it, Annette. He doesn t want any supper to night.
Oui, oui, je sais bien. But I must take the other tray. We need the
things on it.
Well, hurry up, growled Conrad.
Without looking at Tommy the girl went over to the table, and picked up
the tray. She raised a hand and turned out the light.
Curse you Conrad had come to the door why did you do that?
I always turn it out. You should have told me. Shall I relight it,
Monsieur Conrad?
No, come on out of it.
Le beau petit monsieur, cried Annette, pausing by the bed in the
darkness. You have tied him up well, hein? He is like a trussed
chicken! The frank amusement in her tone jarred on the boy; but at
that moment, to his amazement, he felt her hand running lightly over
his bonds, and something small and cold was pressed into the palm of his
hand.
Come on, Annette.
Mais me voil .
The door shut. Tommy heard Conrad say:
Lock it and give me the key.
The footsteps died away. Tommy lay petrified with amazement. The object
Annette had thrust into his hand was a small penknife, the blade open.
From the way she had studiously avoided looking at him, and her action
with the light, he came to the conclusion that the room was overlooked.
There must be a peep hole somewhere in the walls. Remembering how
guarded she had always been in her manner, he saw that he had probably
been under observation all the time. Had he said anything to give
himself away? Hardly. He had revealed a wish to escape and a desire
to find Jane Finn, but nothing that could have given a clue to his
own identity. True, his question to Annette had proved that he was
personally unacquainted with Jane Finn, but he had never pretended
otherwise. The question now was, did Annette really know more? Were her
denials intended primarily for the listeners? On that point he could
come to no conclusion.
But there was a more vital question that drove out all others. Could he,
bound as he was, manage to cut his bonds? He essayed cautiously to
rub the open blade up and down on the cord that bound his two wrists
together. It was an awkward business, and drew a smothered Ow of pain
from him as the knife cut into his wrist. But slowly and doggedly he
went on sawing to and fro. He cut the flesh badly, but at last he felt
the cord slacken. With his hands free, the rest was easy. Five minutes
later he stood upright with some difficulty, owing to the cramp in his
limbs. His first care was to bind up his bleeding wrist. Then he sat on
the edge of the bed to think. Conrad had taken the key of the door, so
he could expect little more assistance from Annette. The only outlet
from the room was the door, consequently he would perforce have to wait
until the two men returned to fetch him. But when they did.... Tommy
smiled! Moving with infinite caution in the dark room, he found and
unhooked the famous picture. He felt an economical pleasure that his
first plan would not be wasted. There was now nothing to do but to wait.
He waited.
The night passed slowly. Tommy lived through an eternity of hours, but
at last he heard footsteps. He stood upright, drew a deep breath, and
clutched the picture firmly.
The door opened. A faint light streamed in from outside. Conrad went
straight towards the gas to light it. Tommy deeply regretted that it was
he who had entered first. It would have been pleasant to get even with
Conrad. Number 14 followed. As he stepped across the threshold, Tommy
brought the picture down with terrific force on his head. Number 14 went
down amidst a stupendous crash of broken glass. In a minute Tommy had
slipped out and pulled to the door. The key was in the lock. He turned
it and withdrew it just as Conrad hurled himself against the door from
the inside with a volley of curses.
For a moment Tommy hesitated. There was the sound of some one stirring
on the floor below. Then the German s voice came up the stairs.
Gott im Himmel! Conrad, what is it?
Tommy felt a small hand thrust into his. Beside him stood Annette. She
pointed up a rickety ladder that apparently led to some attics.
Quick up here! She dragged him after her up the ladder. In another
moment they were standing in a dusty garret littered with lumber. Tommy
looked round.
This won t do. It s a regular trap. There s no way out.
Hush! Wait. The girl put her finger to her lips. She crept to the top
of the ladder and listened.
The banging and beating on the door was terrific. The German and another
were trying to force the door in. Annette explained in a whisper:
They will think you are still inside. They cannot hear what Conrad
says. The door is too thick.
I thought you could hear what went on in the room?
There is a peep hole into the next room. It was clever of you to guess.
But they will not think of that they are only anxious to get in.
Yes but look here
Leave it to me. She bent down. To his amazement, Tommy saw that she
was fastening the end of a long piece of string to the handle of a big
cracked jug. She arranged it carefully, then turned to Tommy.
Have you the key of the door?
Yes.
Give it to me.
He handed it to her.
I am going down. Do you think you can go halfway, and then swing
yourself down behind the ladder, so that they will not see you?
Tommy nodded.
There s a big cupboard in the shadow of the landing. Stand behind it.
Take the end of this string in your hand. When I ve let the others out
pull!
Before he had time to ask her anything more, she had flitted lightly
down the ladder and was in the midst of the group with a loud cry:
Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Qu est ce qu il y a?
The German turned on her with an oath.
Get out of this. Go to your room!
Very cautiously Tommy swung himself down the back of the ladder. So
long as they did not turn round ... all was well. He crouched behind the
cupboard. They were still between him and the stairs.
Ah! Annette appeared to stumble over something. She stooped. Mon
Dieu, voil la clef!
The German snatched it from her. He unlocked the door. Conrad stumbled
out, swearing.
Where is he? Have you got him?
We have seen no one, said the German sharply. His face paled. Who do
you mean?
Conrad gave vent to another oath.
He s got away.
Impossible. He would have passed us.
At that moment, with an ecstatic smile Tommy pulled the string. A crash
of crockery came from the attic above. In a trice the men were pushing
each other up the rickety ladder and had disappeared into the darkness
above.
Quick as a flash Tommy leapt from his hiding place and dashed down the
stairs, pulling the girl with him. There was no one in the hall. He
fumbled over the bolts and chain. At last they yielded, the door swung
open. He turned. Annette had disappeared.
Tommy stood spell bound. Had she run upstairs again? What madness
possessed her! He fumed with impatience, but he stood his ground. He
would not go without her.
And suddenly there was an outcry overhead, an exclamation from the
German, and then Annette s voice, clear and high:
Ma foi, he has escaped! And quickly! Who would have thought it?
Tommy still stood rooted to the ground. Was that a command to him to go?
He fancied it was.
And then, louder still, the words floated down to him:
This is a terrible house. I want to go back to Marguerite. To
Marguerite. To Marguerite!
Tommy had run back to the stairs. She wanted him to go and leave her.
But why? At all costs he must try and get her away with him. Then his
heart sank. Conrad was leaping down the stairs, uttering a savage cry at
the sight of him. After him came the others.
Tommy stopped Conrad s rush with a straight blow with his fist. It
caught the other on the point of the jaw and he fell like a log. The
second man tripped over his body and fell. From higher up the staircase
there was a flash, and a bullet grazed Tommy s ear. He realized that
it would be good for his health to get out of this house as soon as
possible. As regards Annette he could do nothing. He had got even with
Conrad, which was one satisfaction. The blow had been a good one.
He leapt for the door, slamming it behind him. The square was deserted.
In front of the house was a baker s van. Evidently he was to have been
taken out of London in that, and his body found many miles from the
house in Soho. The driver jumped to the pavement and tried to bar
Tommy s way. Again Tommy s fist shot out, and the driver sprawled on the
pavement.
Tommy took to his heels and ran none too soon. The front door opened
and a hail of bullets followed him. Fortunately none of them hit him. He
turned the corner of the square.
There s one thing, he thought to himself, they can t go on shooting.
They ll have the police after them if they do. I wonder they dared to
there.
He heard the footsteps of his pursuers behind him, and redoubled his own
pace. Once he got out of these by ways he would be safe. There would be
a policeman about somewhere not that he really wanted to invoke the aid
of the police if he could possibly do without it. It meant explanations,
and general awkwardness. In another moment he had reason to bless his
luck. He stumbled over a prostrate figure, which started up with a yell
of alarm and dashed off down the street. Tommy drew back into a doorway.
In a minute he had the pleasure of seeing his two pursuers, of whom the
German was one, industriously tracking down the red herring!
Tommy sat down quietly on the doorstep and allowed a few moments to
elapse while he recovered his breath. Then he strolled gently in the
opposite direction. He glanced at his watch. It was a little after
half past five. It was rapidly growing light. At the next corner he
passed a policeman. The policeman cast a suspicious eye on him. Tommy
felt slightly offended. Then, passing his hand over his face, he
laughed. He had not shaved or washed for three days! What a guy he must
look.
He betook himself without more ado to a Turkish Bath establishment which
he knew to be open all night. He emerged into the busy daylight feeling
himself once more, and able to make plans.
First of all, he must have a square meal. He had eaten nothing since
midday yesterday. He turned into an A.B.C. shop and ordered eggs and
bacon and coffee. Whilst he ate, he read a morning paper propped up
in front of him. Suddenly he stiffened. There was a long article on
Kramenin, who was described as the man behind Bolshevism in Russia,
and who had just arrived in London some thought as an unofficial envoy.
His career was sketched lightly, and it was firmly asserted that he,
and not the figurehead leaders, had been the author of the Russian
Revolution.
In the centre of the page was his portrait.
So that s who Number 1 is, said Tommy with his mouth full of eggs and
bacon. Not a doubt about it, I must push on.
He paid for his breakfast, and betook himself to Whitehall. There he
sent up his name, and the message that it was urgent. A few minutes
later he was in the presence of the man who did not here go by the name
of Mr. Carter. There was a frown on his face.
Look here, you ve no business to come asking for me in this way. I
thought that was distinctly understood?
It was, sir. But I judged it important to lose no time.
And as briefly and succinctly as possible he detailed the experiences of
the last few days.
Half way through, Mr. Carter interrupted him to give a few cryptic
orders through the telephone. All traces of displeasure had now left his
face. He nodded energetically when Tommy had finished.
Quite right. Every moment s of value. Fear we shall be too late anyway.
They wouldn t wait. Would clear out at once. Still, they may have left
something behind them that will be a clue. You say you ve recognized
Number 1 to be Kramenin? That s important. We want something against him
badly to prevent the Cabinet falling on his neck too freely. What about
the others? You say two faces were familiar to you? One s a Labour man,
you think? Just look through these photos, and see if you can spot him.
A minute later, Tommy held one up. Mr. Carter exhibited some surprise.
Ah, Westway! Shouldn t have thought it. Poses as being moderate. As for
the other fellow, I think I can give a good guess. He handed another
photograph to Tommy, and smiled at the other s exclamation. I m right,
then. Who is he? Irishman. Prominent Unionist M.P. All a blind, of
course. We ve suspected it but couldn t get any proof. Yes, you ve done
very well, young man. The 29th, you say, is the date. That gives us very
little time very little time indeed.
But Tommy hesitated.
Mr. Carter read his thoughts.
We can deal with the General Strike menace, I think. It s a
toss up but we ve got a sporting chance! But if that draft treaty turns
up we re done. England will be plunged in anarchy. Ah, what s that?
The car? Come on, Beresford, we ll go and have a look at this house of
yours.
Two constables were on duty in front of the house in Soho. An inspector
reported to Mr. Carter in a low voice. The latter turned to Tommy.
The birds have flown as we thought. We might as well go over it.
Going over the deserted house seemed to Tommy to partake of the
character of a dream. Everything was just as it had been. The prison
room with the crooked pictures, the broken jug in the attic, the meeting
room with its long table. But nowhere was there a trace of papers.
Everything of that kind had either been destroyed or taken away. And
there was no sign of Annette.
What you tell me about the girl puzzled me, said Mr. Carter. You
believe that she deliberately went back?
It would seem so, sir. She ran upstairs while I was getting the door
open.
H m, she must belong to the gang, then; but, being a woman, didn t feel
like standing by to see a personable young man killed. But evidently
she s in with them, or she wouldn t have gone back.
I can t believe she s really one of them, sir. She seemed so
different
Good looking, I suppose? said Mr. Carter with a smile that made Tommy
flush to the roots of his hair. He admitted Annette s beauty rather
shamefacedly.
By the way, observed Mr. Carter, have you shown yourself to Miss
Tuppence yet? She s been bombarding me with letters about you.
Tuppence? I was afraid she might get a bit rattled. Did she go to the
police?
Mr. Carter shook his head.
Then I wonder how they twigged me.
Mr. Carter looked inquiringly at him, and Tommy explained. The other
nodded thoughtfully.
True, that s rather a curious point. Unless the mention of the Ritz
was an accidental remark?
It might have been, sir. But they must have found out about me suddenly
in some way.
Well, said Mr. Carter, looking round him, there s nothing more to be
done here. What about some lunch with me?
Thanks awfully, sir. But I think I d better get back and rout out
Tuppence.
Of course. Give her my kind regards and tell her not to believe you re
killed too readily next time.
Tommy grinned.
I take a lot of killing, sir.
So I perceive, said Mr. Carter dryly. Well, good bye. Remember you re
a marked man now, and take reasonable care of yourself.
Thank you, sir.
Hailing a taxi briskly Tommy stepped in, and was swiftly borne to the
Ritz , dwelling the while on the pleasurable anticipation of startling
Tuppence.
Wonder what she s been up to. Dogging Rita most likely. By the way,
I suppose that s who Annette meant by Marguerite. I didn t get it at the
time. The thought saddened him a little, for it seemed to prove that
Mrs. Vandemeyer and the girl were on intimate terms.
The taxi drew up at the Ritz . Tommy burst into its sacred portals
eagerly, but his enthusiasm received a check. He was informed that Miss
Cowley had gone out a quarter of an hour ago.
CHAPTER XVIII. THE TELEGRAM
BAFFLED for the moment, Tommy strolled into the restaurant, and ordered
a meal of surpassing excellence. His four days imprisonment had taught
him anew to value good food.
He was in the middle of conveying a particularly choice morsel of Sole
la Jeanette to his mouth, when he caught sight of Julius entering
the room. Tommy waved a menu cheerfully, and succeeded in attracting the
other s attention. At the sight of Tommy, Julius s eyes seemed as though
they would pop out of his head. He strode across, and pump handled
Tommy s hand with what seemed to the latter quite unnecessary vigour.
Holy snakes! he ejaculated. Is it really you?
Of course it is. Why shouldn t it be?
Why shouldn t it be? Say, man, don t you know you ve been given up
for dead? I guess we d have had a solemn requiem for you in another few
days.
Who thought I was dead? demanded Tommy.
Tuppence.
She remembered the proverb about the good dying young, I suppose. There
must be a certain amount of original sin in me to have survived. Where
is Tuppence, by the way?
Isn t she here?
No, the fellows at the office said she d just gone out.
Gone shopping, I guess. I dropped her here in the car about an hour
ago. But, say, can t you shed that British calm of yours, and get down
to it? What on God s earth have you been doing all this time?
If you re feeding here, replied Tommy, order now. It s going to be a
long story.
Julius drew up a chair to the opposite side of the table, summoned a
hovering waiter, and dictated his wishes. Then he turned to Tommy.
Fire ahead. I guess you ve had some few adventures.
One or two, replied Tommy modestly, and plunged into his recital.
Julius listened spellbound. Half the dishes that were placed before him
he forgot to eat. At the end he heaved a long sigh.
Bully for you. Reads like a dime novel!
And now for the home front, said Tommy, stretching out his hand for a
peach.
We el, drawled Julius, I don t mind admitting we ve had some
adventures too.
He, in his turn, assumed the r le of narrator. Beginning with his
unsuccessful reconnoitring at Bournemouth, he passed on to his return
to London, the buying of the car, the growing anxieties of Tuppence,
the call upon Sir James, and the sensational occurrences of the previous
night.
But who killed her? asked Tommy. I don t quite understand.
The doctor kidded himself she took it herself, replied Julius dryly.
And Sir James? What did he think?
Being a legal luminary, he is likewise a human oyster, replied Julius.
I should say he reserved judgment. He went on to detail the events
of the morning.
Lost her memory, eh? said Tommy with interest. By Jove, that explains
why they looked at me so queerly when I spoke of questioning her. Bit of
a slip on my part, that! But it wasn t the sort of thing a fellow would
be likely to guess.
They didn t give you any sort of hint as to where Jane was?
Tommy shook his head regretfully.
Not a word. I m a bit of an ass, as you know. I ought to have got more
out of them somehow.
I guess you re lucky to be here at all. That bluff of yours was the
goods all right. How you ever came to think of it all so pat beats me to
a frazzle!
I was in such a funk I had to think of something, said Tommy simply.
There was a moment s pause, and then Tommy reverted to Mrs. Vandemeyer s
death.
There s no doubt it was chloral?
I believe not. At least they call it heart failure induced by an
overdose, or some such claptrap. It s all right. We don t want to
be worried with an inquest. But I guess Tuppence and I and even the
highbrow Sir James have all got the same idea.
Mr. Brown? hazarded Tommy.
Sure thing.
Tommy nodded.
All the same, he said thoughtfully, Mr. Brown hasn t got wings. I
don t see how he got in and out.
How about some high class thought transference stunt? Some magnetic
influence that irresistibly impelled Mrs. Vandemeyer to commit suicide?
Tommy looked at him with respect.
Good, Julius. Distinctly good. Especially the phraseology. But it
leaves me cold. I yearn for a real Mr. Brown of flesh and blood. I think
the gifted young detectives must get to work, study the entrances and
exits, and tap the bumps on their foreheads until the solution of the
mystery dawns on them. Let s go round to the scene of the crime. I wish
we could get hold of Tuppence. The Ritz would enjoy the spectacle of
the glad reunion.
Inquiry at the office revealed the fact that Tuppence had not yet
returned.
All the same, I guess I ll have a look round upstairs, said Julius.
She might be in my sitting room. He disappeared.
Suddenly a diminutive boy spoke at Tommy s elbow:
The young lady she s gone away by train, I think, sir, he murmured
shyly.
What? Tommy wheeled round upon him.
The small boy became pinker than before.
The taxi, sir. I heard her tell the driver Charing Cross and to look
sharp.
Tommy stared at him, his eyes opening wide in surprise. Emboldened, the
small boy proceeded. So I thought, having asked for an A.B.C. and a
Bradshaw.
Tommy interrupted him:
When did she ask for an A.B.C. and a Bradshaw?
When I took her the telegram, sir.
A telegram?
Yes, sir.
When was that?
About half past twelve, sir.
Tell me exactly what happened.
The small boy drew a long breath.
I took up a telegram to No. 891 the lady was there. She opened it
and gave a gasp, and then she said, very jolly like: Bring me up a
Bradshaw, and an A.B.C., and look sharp, Henry. My name isn t Henry,
but
Never mind your name, said Tommy impatiently. Go on.
Yes, sir. I brought them, and she told me to wait, and looked up
something. And then she looks up at the clock, and Hurry up, she says.
Tell them to get me a taxi, and she begins a shoving on of her hat in
front of the glass, and she was down in two ticks, almost as quick as I
was, and I seed her going down the steps and into the taxi, and I heard
her call out what I told you.
The small boy stopped and replenished his lungs. Tommy continued to
stare at him. At that moment Julius rejoined him. He held an open letter
in his hand.
I say, Hersheimmer Tommy turned to him Tuppence has gone off
sleuthing on her own.
Shucks!
Yes, she has. She went off in a taxi to Charing Cross in the deuce of a
hurry after getting a telegram. His eye fell on the letter in Julius s
hand. Oh; she left a note for you. That s all right. Where s she off
to?
Almost unconsciously, he held out his hand for the letter, but
Julius folded it up and placed it in his pocket. He seemed a trifle
embarrassed.
I guess this is nothing to do with it. It s about something
else something I asked her that she was to let me know about.
Oh! Tommy looked puzzled, and seemed waiting for more.
See here, said Julius suddenly, I d better put you wise. I asked Miss
Tuppence to marry me this morning.
Oh! said Tommy mechanically. He felt dazed. Julius s words were
totally unexpected. For the moment they benumbed his brain.
I d like to tell you, continued Julius, that before I suggested
anything of the kind to Miss Tuppence, I made it clear that I didn t
want to butt in in any way between her and you
Tommy roused himself.
That s all right, he said quickly. Tuppence and I have been pals for
years. Nothing more. He lit a cigarette with a hand that shook ever
so little. That s quite all right. Tuppence always said that she was
looking out for
He stopped abruptly, his face crimsoning, but Julius was in no way
discomposed.
Oh, I guess it ll be the dollars that ll do the trick. Miss Tuppence
put me wise to that right away. There s no humbug about her. We ought to
gee along together very well.
Tommy looked at him curiously for a minute, as though he were about
to speak, then changed his mind and said nothing. Tuppence and Julius!
Well, why not? Had she not lamented the fact that she knew no rich men?
Had she not openly avowed her intention of marrying for money if she
ever had the chance? Her meeting with the young American millionaire
had given her the chance and it was unlikely she would be slow to avail
herself of it. She was out for money. She had always said so. Why blame
her because she had been true to her creed?
Nevertheless, Tommy did blame her. He was filled with a passionate and
utterly illogical resentment. It was all very well to say things
like that but a real girl would never marry for money. Tuppence was
utterly cold blooded and selfish, and he would be delighted if he never
saw her again! And it was a rotten world!
Julius s voice broke in on these meditations.
Yes, we ought to gee along together very well. I ve heard that a girl
always refuses you once a sort of convention.
Tommy caught his arm.
Refuses? Did you say refuses?
Sure thing. Didn t I tell you that? She just rapped out a no without
any kind of reason to it. The eternal feminine, the Huns call it, I ve
heard. But she ll come round right enough. Likely enough, I hustled her
some
But Tommy interrupted regardless of decorum.
What did she say in that note? he demanded fiercely.
The obliging Julius handed it to him.
There s no earthly clue in it as to where she s gone, he assured
Tommy. But you might as well see for yourself if you don t believe me.
The note, in Tuppence s well known schoolboy writing, ran as follows:
DEAR JULIUS,
It s always better to have things in black and white. I don t feel I
can be bothered to think of marriage until Tommy is found. Let s leave
it till then.
Yours affectionately,
TUPPENCE.
Tommy handed it back, his eyes shining. His feelings had undergone a
sharp reaction. He now felt that Tuppence was all that was noble and
disinterested. Had she not refused Julius without hesitation? True, the
note betokened signs of weakening, but he could excuse that. It read
almost like a bribe to Julius to spur him on in his efforts to find
Tommy, but he supposed she had not really meant it that way. Darling
Tuppence, there was not a girl in the world to touch her! When he saw
her His thoughts were brought up with a sudden jerk.
As you say, he remarked, pulling himself together, there s not a hint
here as to what she s up to. Hi Henry!
The small boy came obediently. Tommy produced five shillings.
One thing more. Do you remember what the young lady did with the
telegram?
Henry gasped and spoke.
She crumpled it up into a ball and threw it into the grate, and made a
sort of noise like Whoop! sir.
Very graphic, Henry, said Tommy. Here s your five shillings. Come on,
Julius. We must find that telegram.
They hurried upstairs. Tuppence had left the key in her door. The room
was as she had left it. In the fireplace was a crumpled ball of orange
and white. Tommy disentangled it and smoothed out the telegram.
Come at once, Moat House, Ebury, Yorkshire, great developments TOMMY.
They looked at each other in stupefaction. Julius spoke first:
You didn t send it?
Of course not. What does it mean?
I guess it means the worst, said Julius quietly. They ve got her.
What?
Sure thing! They signed your name, and she fell into the trap like a
lamb.
My God! What shall we do?
Get busy, and go after her! Right now! There s no time to waste. It s
almighty luck that she didn t take the wire with her. If she had we d
probably never have traced her. But we ve got to hustle. Where s that
Bradshaw?
The energy of Julius was infectious. Left to himself, Tommy would
probably have sat down to think things out for a good half hour before
he decided on a plan of action. But with Julius Hersheimmer about,
hustling was inevitable.
After a few muttered imprecations he handed the Bradshaw to Tommy as
being more conversant with its mysteries. Tommy abandoned it in favour
of an A.B.C.
Here we are. Ebury, Yorks. From King s Cross. Or St. Pancras. Boy must
have made a mistake. It was King s Cross, not Charing Cross. 12.50,
that s the train she went by. 2.10, that s gone. 3.20 is the next and a
damned slow train too.
What about the car?
Tommy shook his head.
Send it up if you like, but we d better stick to the train. The great
thing is to keep calm.
Julius groaned.
That s so. But it gets my goat to think of that innocent young girl in
danger!
Tommy nodded abstractedly. He was thinking. In a moment or two, he said:
I say, Julius, what do they want her for, anyway?
Eh? I don t get you?
What I mean is that I don t think it s their game to do her any harm,
explained Tommy, puckering his brow with the strain of his mental
processes. She s a hostage, that s what she is. She s in no immediate
danger, because if we tumble on to anything, she d be damned useful to
them. As long as they ve got her, they ve got the whip hand of us. See?
Sure thing, said Julius thoughtfully. That s so.
Besides, added Tommy, as an afterthought, I ve great faith in
Tuppence.
The journey was wearisome, with many stops, and crowded carriages. They
had to change twice, once at Doncaster, once at a small junction. Ebury
was a deserted station with a solitary porter, to whom Tommy addressed
himself:
Can you tell me the way to the Moat House?
The Moat House? It s a tidy step from here. The big house near the sea,
you mean?
Tommy assented brazenly. After listening to the porter s meticulous
but perplexing directions, they prepared to leave the station. It was
beginning to rain, and they turned up the collars of their coats as they
trudged through the slush of the road. Suddenly Tommy halted.
Wait a moment. He ran back to the station and tackled the porter anew.
Look here, do you remember a young lady who arrived by an earlier
train, the 12.50 from London? She d probably ask you the way to the Moat
House.
He described Tuppence as well as he could, but the porter shook his
head. Several people had arrived by the train in question. He could not
call to mind one young lady in particular. But he was quite certain that
no one had asked him the way to the Moat House.
Tommy rejoined Julius, and explained. Depression was settling on him
like a leaden weight. He felt convinced that their quest was going to
be unsuccessful. The enemy had over three hours start. Three hours was
more than enough for Mr. Brown. He would not ignore the possibility of
the telegram having been found.
The way seemed endless. Once they took the wrong turning and went nearly
half a mile out of their direction. It was past seven o clock when a
small boy told them that t Moat House was just past the next corner.
A rusty iron gate swinging dismally on its hinges! An overgrown drive
thick with leaves. There was something about the place that struck a
chill to both their hearts. They went up the deserted drive. The leaves
deadened their footsteps. The daylight was almost gone. It was like
walking in a world of ghosts. Overhead the branches flapped and creaked
with a mournful note. Occasionally a sodden leaf drifted silently down,
startling them with its cold touch on their cheek.
A turn of the drive brought them in sight of the house. That, too,
seemed empty and deserted. The shutters were closed, the steps up to
the door overgrown with moss. Was it indeed to this desolate spot
that Tuppence had been decoyed? It seemed hard to believe that a human
footstep had passed this way for months.
Julius jerked the rusty bell handle. A jangling peal rang discordantly,
echoing through the emptiness within. No one came. They rang again and
again but there was no sign of life. Then they walked completely round
the house. Everywhere silence, and shuttered windows. If they could
believe the evidence of their eyes the place was empty.
Nothing doing, said Julius.
They retraced their steps slowly to the gate.
There must be a village handy, continued the young American. We d
better make inquiries there. They ll know something about the place, and
whether there s been anyone there lately.
Yes, that s not a bad idea.
Proceeding up the road, they soon came to a little hamlet. On the
outskirts of it, they met a workman swinging his bag of tools, and Tommy
stopped him with a question.
The Moat House? It s empty. Been empty for years. Mrs. Sweeny s got the
key if you want to go over it next to the post office.
Tommy thanked him. They soon found the post office, which was also a
sweet and general fancy shop, and knocked at the door of the cottage
next to it. A clean, wholesome looking woman opened it. She readily
produced the key of the Moat House.
Though I doubt if it s the kind of place to suit you, sir. In a
terrible state of repair. Ceilings leaking and all. Twould need a lot
of money spent on it.
Thanks, said Tommy cheerily. I dare say it ll be a washout, but
houses are scarce nowadays.
That they are, declared the woman heartily. My daughter and
son in law have been looking for a decent cottage for I don t know how
long. It s all the war. Upset things terribly, it has. But excuse me,
sir, it ll be too dark for you to see much of the house. Hadn t you
better wait until to morrow?
That s all right. We ll have a look around this evening, anyway. We d
have been here before only we lost our way. What s the best place to
stay at for the night round here?
Mrs. Sweeny looked doubtful.
There s the Yorkshire Arms , but it s not much of a place for
gentlemen like you.
Oh, it will do very well. Thanks. By the way, you ve not had a young
lady here asking for this key to day?
The woman shook her head.
No one s been over the place for a long time.
Thanks very much.
They retraced their steps to the Moat House. As the front door swung
back on its hinges, protesting loudly, Julius struck a match and
examined the floor carefully. Then he shook his head.
I d swear no one s passed this way. Look at the dust. Thick. Not a sign
of a footmark.
They wandered round the deserted house. Everywhere the same tale. Thick
layers of dust apparently undisturbed.
This gets me, said Julius. I don t believe Tuppence was ever in this
house.
She must have been.
Julius shook his head without replying.
We ll go over it again to morrow, said Tommy. Perhaps we ll see more
in the daylight.
On the morrow they took up the search once more, and were reluctantly
forced to the conclusion that the house had not been invaded for some
considerable time. They might have left the village altogether but for
a fortunate discovery of Tommy s. As they were retracing their steps to
the gate, he gave a sudden cry, and stooping, picked something up from
among the leaves, and held it out to Julius. It was a small gold brooch.
That s Tuppence s!
Are you sure?
Absolutely. I ve often seen her wear it.
Julius drew a deep breath.
I guess that settles it. She came as far as here, anyway. We ll make
that pub our head quarters, and raise hell round here until we find her.
Somebody must have seen her.
Forthwith the campaign began. Tommy and Julius worked separately and
together, but the result was the same. Nobody answering to Tuppence s
description had been seen in the vicinity. They were baffled but not
discouraged. Finally they altered their tactics. Tuppence had certainly
not remained long in the neighbourhood of the Moat House. That pointed
to her having been overcome and carried away in a car. They renewed
inquiries. Had anyone seen a car standing somewhere near the Moat House
that day? Again they met with no success.
Julius wired to town for his own car, and they scoured the neighbourhood
daily with unflagging zeal. A grey limousine on which they had set high
hopes was traced to Harrogate, and turned out to be the property of a
highly respectable maiden lady!
Each day saw them set out on a new quest. Julius was like a hound on
the leash. He followed up the slenderest clue. Every car that had passed
through the village on the fateful day was tracked down. He forced his
way into country properties and submitted the owners of the motors to
a searching cross examination. His apologies were as thorough as his
methods, and seldom failed in disarming the indignation of his victims;
but, as day succeeded day, they were no nearer to discovering Tuppence s
whereabouts. So well had the abduction been planned that the girl seemed
literally to have vanished into thin air.
And another preoccupation was weighing on Tommy s mind.
Do you know how long we ve been here? he asked one morning as they
sat facing each other at breakfast. A week! We re no nearer to finding
Tuppence, and next Sunday is the 29 th!
Shucks! said Julius thoughtfully. I d almost forgotten about the
29th. I ve been thinking of nothing but Tuppence.
So have I. At least, I hadn t forgotten about the 29th, but it didn t
seem to matter a damn in comparison to finding Tuppence. But to day s
the 23rd, and time s getting short. If we re ever going to get hold of
her at all, we must do it before the 29th her life won t be worth an
hour s purchase afterwards. The hostage game will be played out by then.
I m beginning to feel that we ve made a big mistake in the way we ve set
about this. We ve wasted time and we re no forrader.
I m with you there. We ve been a couple of mutts, who ve bitten off a
bigger bit than they can chew. I m going to quit fooling right away!
What do you mean?
I ll tell you. I m going to do what we ought to have done a week ago.
I m going right back to London to put the case in the hands of your
British police. We fancied ourselves as sleuths. Sleuths! It was a piece
of damn fool foolishness! I m through! I ve had enough of it. Scotland
Yard for me!
You re right, said Tommy slowly. I wish to God we d gone there right
away.
Better late than never. We ve been like a couple of babes playing Here
we go round the Mulberry Bush. Now I m going right along to Scotland
Yard to ask them to take me by the hand and show me the way I should go.
I guess the professional always scores over the amateur in the end. Are
you coming along with me?
Tommy shook his head.
What s the good? One of us is enough. I might as well stay here and
nose round a bit longer. Something might turn up. One never knows.
Sure thing. Well, so long. I ll be back in a couple of shakes with a
few inspectors along. I shall tell them to pick out their brightest and
best.
But the course of events was not to follow the plan Julius had laid
down. Later in the day Tommy received a wire:
Join me Manchester Midland Hotel. Important news JULIUS.
At 7.30 that night Tommy alighted from a slow cross country train.
Julius was on the platform.
Thought you d come by this train if you weren t out when my wire
arrived.
Tommy grasped him by the arm.
What is it? Is Tuppence found?
Julius shook his head.
No. But I found this waiting in London. Just arrived.
He handed the telegraph form to the other. Tommy s eyes opened as he
read:
Jane Finn found. Come Manchester Midland Hotel immediately PEEL
EDGERTON.
Julius took the form back and folded it up.
Queer, he said thoughtfully. I thought that lawyer chap had quit!
CHAPTER XIX. JANE FINN
MY train got in half an hour ago, explained Julius, as he led the way
out of the station. I reckoned you d come by this before I left London,
and wired accordingly to Sir James. He s booked rooms for us, and will
be round to dine at eight.
What made you think he d ceased to take any interest in the case?
asked Tommy curiously.
What he said, replied Julius dryly. The old bird s as close as an
oyster! Like all the darned lot of them, he wasn t going to commit
himself till he was sure he could deliver the goods.
I wonder, said Tommy thoughtfully.
Julius turned on him.
You wonder what?
Whether that was his real reason.
Sure. You bet your life it was.
Tommy shook his head unconvinced.
Sir James arrived punctually at eight o clock, and Julius introduced
Tommy. Sir James shook hands with him warmly.
I am delighted to make your acquaintance, Mr. Beresford. I have heard
so much about you from Miss Tuppence he smiled involuntarily that it
really seems as though I already know you quite well.
Thank you, sir, said Tommy with his cheerful grin. He scanned the
great lawyer eagerly. Like Tuppence, he felt the magnetism of the
other s personality. He was reminded of Mr. Carter. The two men, totally
unlike so far as physical resemblance went, produced a similar effect.
Beneath the weary manner of the one and the professional reserve of the
other, lay the same quality of mind, keen edged like a rapier.
In the meantime he was conscious of Sir James s close scrutiny. When the
lawyer dropped his eyes the young man had the feeling that the other had
read him through and through like an open book. He could not but wonder
what the final judgment was, but there was little chance of learning
that. Sir James took in everything, but gave out only what he chose. A
proof of that occurred almost at once.
Immediately the first greetings were over Julius broke out into a flood
of eager questions. How had Sir James managed to track the girl? Why had
he not let them know that he was still working on the case? And so on.
Sir James stroked his chin and smiled. At last he said:
Just so, just so. Well, she s found. And that s the great thing, isn t
it? Eh! Come now, that s the great thing?
Sure it is. But just how did you strike her trail? Miss Tuppence and I
thought you d quit for good and all.
Ah! The lawyer shot a lightning glance at him, then resumed operations
on his chin. You thought that, did you? Did you really? H m, dear me.
But I guess I can take it we were wrong, pursued Julius.
Well, I don t know that I should go so far as to say that. But it s
certainly fortunate for all parties that we ve managed to find the young
lady.
But where is she? demanded Julius, his thoughts flying off on another
tack. I thought you d be sure to bring her along?
That would hardly be possible, said Sir James gravely.
Why?
Because the young lady was knocked down in a street accident, and has
sustained slight injuries to the head. She was taken to the infirmary,
and on recovering consciousness gave her name as Jane Finn. When ah! I
heard that, I arranged for her to be removed to the house of a
doctor a friend of mine, and wired at once for you. She relapsed into
unconsciousness and has not spoken since.
She s not seriously hurt?
Oh, a bruise and a cut or two; really, from a medical point of view,
absurdly slight injuries to have produced such a condition. Her state is
probably to be attributed to the mental shock consequent on recovering
her memory.
It s come back? cried Julius excitedly.
Sir James tapped the table rather impatiently.
Undoubtedly, Mr. Hersheimmer, since she was able to give her real name.
I thought you had appreciated that point.
And you just happened to be on the spot, said Tommy. Seems quite like
a fairy tale.
But Sir James was far too wary to be drawn.
Coincidences are curious things, he said dryly.
Nevertheless Tommy was now certain of what he had before only suspected.
Sir James s presence in Manchester was not accidental. Far from
abandoning the case, as Julius supposed, he had by some means of his own
successfully run the missing girl to earth. The only thing that puzzled
Tommy was the reason for all this secrecy. He concluded that it was a
foible of the legal mind.
Julius was speaking.
After dinner, he announced, I shall go right away and see Jane.
That will be impossible, I fear, said Sir James. It is very unlikely
they would allow her to see visitors at this time of night. I should
suggest to morrow morning about ten o clock.
Julius flushed. There was something in Sir James which always stirred
him to antagonism. It was a conflict of two masterful personalities.
All the same, I reckon I ll go round there to night and see if I can t
ginger them up to break through their silly rules.
It will be quite useless, Mr. Hersheimmer.
The words came out like the crack of a pistol, and Tommy looked up with
a start. Julius was nervous and excited. The hand with which he raised
his glass to his lips shook slightly, but his eyes held Sir James s
defiantly. For a moment the hostility between the two seemed likely to
burst into flame, but in the end Julius lowered his eyes, defeated.
For the moment, I reckon you re the boss.
Thank you, said the other. We will say ten o clock then? With
consummate ease of manner he turned to Tommy. I must confess, Mr.
Beresford, that it was something of a surprise to me to see you here
this evening. The last I heard of you was that your friends were in
grave anxiety on your behalf. Nothing had been heard of you for
some days, and Miss Tuppence was inclined to think you had got into
difficulties.
I had, sir! Tommy grinned reminiscently. I was never in a tighter
place in my life.
Helped out by questions from Sir James, he gave an abbreviated account
of his adventures. The lawyer looked at him with renewed interest as he
brought the tale to a close.
You got yourself out of a tight place very well, he said gravely. I
congratulate you. You displayed a great deal of ingenuity and carried
your part through well.
Tommy blushed, his face assuming a prawnlike hue at the praise.
I couldn t have got away but for the girl, sir.
No. Sir James smiled a little. It was lucky for you she happened
to er take a fancy to you. Tommy appeared about to protest, but Sir
James went on. There s no doubt about her being one of the gang, I
suppose?
I m afraid not, sir. I thought perhaps they were keeping her there by
force, but the way she acted didn t fit in with that. You see, she went
back to them when she could have got away.
Sir James nodded thoughtfully.
What did she say? Something about wanting to be taken to Marguerite?
Yes, sir. I suppose she meant Mrs. Vandemeyer.
She always signed herself Rita Vandemeyer. All her friends spoke of
her as Rita. Still, I suppose the girl must have been in the habit of
calling her by her full name. And, at the moment she was crying out to
her, Mrs. Vandemeyer was either dead or dying! Curious! There are one
or two points that strike me as being obscure their sudden change
of attitude towards yourself, for instance. By the way, the house was
raided, of course?
Yes, sir, but they d all cleared out.
Naturally, said Sir James dryly.
And not a clue left behind.
I wonder The lawyer tapped the table thoughtfully.
Something in his voice made Tommy look up. Would this man s eyes have
seen something where theirs had been blind? He spoke impulsively:
I wish you d been there, sir, to go over the house!
I wish I had, said Sir James quietly. He sat for a moment in silence.
Then he looked up. And since then? What have you been doing?
For a moment, Tommy stared at him. Then it dawned on him that of course
the lawyer did not know.
I forgot that you didn t know about Tuppence, he said slowly. The
sickening anxiety, forgotten for a while in the excitement of knowing
Jane Finn was found at last, swept over him again.
The lawyer laid down his knife and fork sharply.
Has anything happened to Miss Tuppence? His voice was keen edged.
She s disappeared, said Julius.
When?
A week ago.
How?
Sir James s questions fairly shot out. Between them Tommy and Julius
gave the history of the last week and their futile search.
Sir James went at once to the root of the matter.
A wire signed with your name? They knew enough of you both for that.
They weren t sure of how much you had learnt in that house. Their
kidnapping of Miss Tuppence is the counter move to your escape. If
necessary they could seal your lips with a threat of what might happen
to her.
Tommy nodded.
That s just what I thought, sir.
Sir James looked at him keenly. You had worked that out, had you? Not
bad not at all bad. The curious thing is that they certainly did not
know anything about you when they first held you prisoner. You are sure
that you did not in any way disclose your identity?
Tommy shook his head.
That s so, said Julius with a nod. Therefore I reckon some one put
them wise and not earlier than Sunday afternoon.
Yes, but who?
That almighty omniscient Mr. Brown, of course!
There was a faint note of derision in the American s voice which made
Sir James look up sharply.
You don t believe in Mr. Brown, Mr. Hersheimmer?
No, sir, I do not, returned the young American with emphasis. Not
as such, that is to say. I reckon it out that he s a figurehead just a
bogy name to frighten the children with. The real head of this business
is that Russian chap Kramenin. I guess he s quite capable of running
revolutions in three countries at once if he chose! The man Whittington
is probably the head of the English branch.
I disagree with you, said Sir James shortly. Mr. Brown exists. He
turned to Tommy. Did you happen to notice where that wire was handed
in?
No, sir, I m afraid I didn t.
H m. Got it with you?
It s upstairs, sir, in my kit.
I d like to have a look at it sometime. No hurry. You ve wasted a
week Tommy hung his head a day or so more is immaterial. We ll deal
with Miss Jane Finn first. Afterwards, we ll set to work to rescue Miss
Tuppence from bondage. I don t think she s in any immediate danger. That
is, so long as they don t know that we ve got Jane Finn, and that
her memory has returned. We must keep that dark at all costs. You
understand?
The other two assented, and, after making arrangements for meeting on
the morrow, the great lawyer took his leave.
At ten o clock, the two young men were at the appointed spot. Sir
James had joined them on the doorstep. He alone appeared unexcited. He
introduced them to the doctor.
Mr. Hersheimmer Mr. Beresford Dr. Roylance. How s the patient?
Going on well. Evidently no idea of the flight of time. Asked this
morning how many had been saved from the Lusitania . Was it in the
papers yet? That, of course, was only what was to be expected. She seems
to have something on her mind, though.
I think we can relieve her anxiety. May we go up?
Certainly.
Tommy s heart beat sensibly faster as they followed the doctor upstairs.
Jane Finn at last! The long sought, the mysterious, the elusive Jane
Finn! How wildly improbable success had seemed! And here in this house,
her memory almost miraculously restored, lay the girl who held the
future of England in her hands. A half groan broke from Tommy s lips.
If only Tuppence could have been at his side to share in the triumphant
conclusion of their joint venture! Then he put the thought of Tuppence
resolutely aside. His confidence in Sir James was growing. There was
a man who would unerringly ferret out Tuppence s whereabouts. In the
meantime Jane Finn! And suddenly a dread clutched at his heart. It
seemed too easy.... Suppose they should find her dead ... stricken down
by the hand of Mr. Brown?
In another minute he was laughing at these melodramatic fancies. The
doctor held open the door of a room and they passed in. On the white
bed, bandages round her head, lay the girl. Somehow the whole scene
seemed unreal. It was so exactly what one expected that it gave the
effect of being beautifully staged.
The girl looked from one to the other of them with large wondering eyes.
Sir James spoke first.
Miss Finn, he said, this is your cousin, Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer.
A faint flush flitted over the girl s face, as Julius stepped forward
and took her hand.
How do, Cousin Jane? he said lightly.
But Tommy caught the tremor in his voice.
Are you really Uncle Hiram s son? she asked wonderingly.
Her voice, with the slight warmth of the Western accent, had an almost
thrilling quality. It seemed vaguely familiar to Tommy, but he thrust
the impression aside as impossible.
Sure thing.
We used to read about Uncle Hiram in the papers, continued the girl,
in her low soft tones. But I never thought I d meet you one day. Mother
figured it out that Uncle Hiram would never get over being mad with
her.
The old man was like that, admitted Julius. But I guess the new
generation s sort of different. Got no use for the family feud business.
First thing I thought about, soon as the war was over, was to come along
and hunt you up.
A shadow passed over the girl s face.
They ve been telling me things dreadful things that my memory went,
and that there are years I shall never know about years lost out of my
life.
You didn t realize that yourself?
The girl s eyes opened wide.
Why, no. It seems to me as though it were no time since we were being
hustled into those boats. I can see it all now. She closed her eyes
with a shudder.
Julius looked across at Sir James, who nodded.
Don t worry any. It isn t worth it. Now, see here, Jane, there s
something we want to know about. There was a man aboard that boat with
some mighty important papers on him, and the big guns in this country
have got a notion that he passed on the goods to you. Is that so?
The girl hesitated, her glance shifting to the other two. Julius
understood.
Mr. Beresford is commissioned by the British Government to get those
papers back. Sir James Peel Edgerton is an English Member of Parliament,
and might be a big gun in the Cabinet if he liked. It s owing to him
that we ve ferreted you out at last. So you can go right ahead and tell
us the whole story. Did Danvers give you the papers?
Yes. He said they d have a better chance with me, because they would
save the women and children first.
Just as we thought, said Sir James.
He said they were very important that they might make all the
difference to the Allies. But, if it s all so long ago, and the war s
over, what does it matter now?
I guess history repeats itself, Jane. First there was a great hue
and cry over those papers, then it all died down, and now the whole
caboodle s started all over again for rather different reasons. Then
you can hand them over to us right away?
But I can t.
What?
I haven t got them.
You haven t got them? Julius punctuated the words with little
pauses.
No I hid them.
You hid them?
Yes. I got uneasy. People seemed to be watching me. It scared
me badly. She put her hand to her head. It s almost the last thing I
remember before waking up in the hospital....
Go on, said Sir James, in his quiet penetrating tones. What do you
remember?
She turned to him obediently.
It was at Holyhead. I came that way I don t remember why....
That doesn t matter. Go on.
In the confusion on the quay I slipped away. Nobody saw me. I took a
car. Told the man to drive me out of the town. I watched when we got on
the open road. No other car was following us. I saw a path at the side
of the road. I told the man to wait.
She paused, then went on. The path led to the cliff, and down to the
sea between big yellow gorse bushes they were like golden flames. I
looked round. There wasn t a soul in sight. But just level with my head
there was a hole in the rock. It was quite small I could only just get
my hand in, but it went a long way back. I took the oilskin packet from
round my neck and shoved it right in as far as I could. Then I tore off
a bit of gorse My! but it did prick and plugged the hole with it so
that you d never guess there was a crevice of any kind there. Then I
marked the place carefully in my own mind, so that I d find it again.
There was a queer boulder in the path just there for all the world
like a dog sitting up begging. Then I went back to the road. The car was
waiting, and I drove back. I just caught the train. I was a bit ashamed
of myself for fancying things maybe, but, by and by, I saw the man
opposite me wink at a woman who was sitting next to me, and I felt
scared again, and was glad the papers were safe. I went out in the
corridor to get a little air. I thought I d slip into another carriage.
But the woman called me back, said I d dropped something, and when I
stooped to look, something seemed to hit me here. She placed her hand
to the back of her head. I don t remember anything more until I woke up
in the hospital.
There was a pause.
Thank you, Miss Finn. It was Sir James who spoke. I hope we have not
tired you?
Oh, that s all right. My head aches a little, but otherwise I feel
fine.
Julius stepped forward and took her hand again.
So long, Cousin Jane. I m going to get busy after those papers, but
I ll be back in two shakes of a dog s tail, and I ll tote you up to
London and give you the time of your young life before we go back to the
States! I mean it so hurry up and get well.
CHAPTER XX. TOO LATE
IN the street they held an informal council of war. Sir James had drawn
a watch from his pocket. The boat train to Holyhead stops at Chester at
12.14. If you start at once I think you can catch the connection.
Tommy looked up, puzzled.
Is there any need to hurry, sir? To day is only the 24th.
I guess it s always well to get up early in the morning, said Julius,
before the lawyer had time to reply. We ll make tracks for the depot
right away.
A little frown had settled on Sir James s brow.
I wish I could come with you. I am due to speak at a meeting at two
o clock. It is unfortunate.
The reluctance in his tone was very evident. It was clear, on the other
hand, that Julius was easily disposed to put up with the loss of the
other s company.
I guess there s nothing complicated about this deal, he remarked.
Just a game of hide and seek, that s all.
I hope so, said Sir James.
Sure thing. What else could it be?
You are still young, Mr. Hersheimmer. At my age you will probably have
learnt one lesson. Never underestimate your adversary.
The gravity of his tone impressed Tommy, but had little effect upon
Julius.
You think Mr. Brown might come along and take a hand? If he does, I m
ready for him. He slapped his pocket. I carry a gun. Little Willie
here travels round with me everywhere. He produced a murderous looking
automatic, and tapped it affectionately before returning it to its
home. But he won t be needed this trip. There s nobody to put Mr. Brown
wise.
The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.
There was nobody to put Mr. Brown wise to the fact that Mrs. Vandemeyer
meant to betray him. Nevertheless, Mrs. Vandemeyer died without
speaking .
Julius was silenced for once, and Sir James added on a lighter note:
I only want to put you on your guard. Good bye, and good luck. Take
no unnecessary risks once the papers are in your hands. If there is any
reason to believe that you have been shadowed, destroy them at once.
Good luck to you. The game is in your hands now. He shook hands with
them both.
Ten minutes later the two young men were seated in a first class
carriage en route for Chester.
For a long time neither of them spoke. When at length Julius broke the
silence, it was with a totally unexpected remark.
Say, he observed thoughtfully, did you ever make a darned fool of
yourself over a girl s face?
Tommy, after a moment s astonishment, searched his mind.
Can t say I have, he replied at last. Not that I can recollect,
anyhow. Why?
Because for the last two months I ve been making a sentimental idiot of
myself over Jane! First moment I clapped eyes on her photograph my heart
did all the usual stunts you read about in novels. I guess I m ashamed
to admit it, but I came over here determined to find her and fix it all
up, and take her back as Mrs. Julius P. Hersheimmer!
Oh! said Tommy, amazed.
Julius uncrossed his legs brusquely and continued:
Just shows what an almighty fool a man can make of himself! One look at
the girl in the flesh, and I was cured!
Feeling more tongue tied than ever, Tommy ejaculated Oh! again.
No disparagement to Jane, mind you, continued the other. She s a real
nice girl, and some fellow will fall in love with her right away.
I thought her a very good looking girl, said Tommy, finding his
tongue.
Sure she is. But she s not like her photo one bit. At least I suppose
she is in a way must be because I recognized her right off. If I d
seen her in a crowd I d have said There s a girl whose face I know
right away without any hesitation. But there was something about that
photo Julius shook his head, and heaved a sigh I guess romance is a
mighty queer thing!
It must be, said Tommy coldly, if you can come over here in love with
one girl, and propose to another within a fortnight.
Julius had the grace to look discomposed.
Well, you see, I d got a sort of tired feeling that I d never find
Jane and that it was all plumb foolishness anyway. And then oh, well,
the French, for instance, are much more sensible in the way they look at
things. They keep romance and marriage apart
Tommy flushed.
Well, I m damned! If that s
Julius hastened to interrupt.
Say now, don t be hasty. I don t mean what you mean. I take it
Americans have a higher opinion of morality than you have even. What I
meant was that the French set about marriage in a businesslike way find
two people who are suited to one another, look after the money affairs,
and see the whole thing practically, and in a businesslike spirit.
If you ask me, said Tommy, we re all too damned businesslike
nowadays. We re always saying, Will it pay? The men are bad enough,
and the girls are worse!
Cool down, son. Don t get so heated.
I feel heated, said Tommy.
Julius looked at him and judged it wise to say no more.
However, Tommy had plenty of time to cool down before they reached
Holyhead, and the cheerful grin had returned to his countenance as they
alighted at their destination.
After consultation, and with the aid of a road map, they were fairly
well agreed as to direction, so were able to hire a taxi without more
ado and drive out on the road leading to Treaddur Bay. They instructed
the man to go slowly, and watched narrowly so as not to miss the path.
They came to it not long after leaving the town, and Tommy stopped the
car promptly, asked in a casual tone whether the path led down to the
sea, and hearing it did paid off the man in handsome style.
A moment later the taxi was slowly chugging back to Holyhead. Tommy and
Julius watched it out of sight, and then turned to the narrow path.
It s the right one, I suppose? asked Tommy doubtfully. There must be
simply heaps along here.
Sure it is. Look at the gorse. Remember what Jane said?
Tommy looked at the swelling hedges of golden blossom which bordered the
path on either side, and was convinced.
They went down in single file, Julius leading. Twice Tommy turned his
head uneasily. Julius looked back.
What is it?
I don t know. I ve got the wind up somehow. Keep fancying there s some
one following us.
Can t be, said Julius positively. We d see him.
Tommy had to admit that this was true. Nevertheless, his sense of
uneasiness deepened. In spite of himself he believed in the omniscience
of the enemy.
I rather wish that fellow would come along, said Julius. He patted his
pocket. Little William here is just aching for exercise!
Do you always carry it him with you? inquired Tommy with burning
curiosity.
Most always. I guess you never know what might turn up.
Tommy kept a respectful silence. He was impressed by little William. It
seemed to remove the menace of Mr. Brown farther away.
The path was now running along the side of the cliff, parallel to the
sea. Suddenly Julius came to such an abrupt halt that Tommy cannoned
into him.
What s up? he inquired.
Look there. If that doesn t beat the band!
Tommy looked. Standing out half obstructing the path was a huge boulder
which certainly bore a fanciful resemblance to a begging terrier.
Well, said Tommy, refusing to share Julius s emotion, it s what we
expected to see, isn t it?
Julius looked at him sadly and shook his head.
British phlegm! Sure we expected it but it kind of rattles me, all the
same, to see it sitting there just where we expected to find it!
Tommy, whose calm was, perhaps, more assumed than natural, moved his
feet impatiently.
Push on. What about the hole?
They scanned the cliff side narrowly. Tommy heard himself saying
idiotically:
The gorse won t be there after all these years.
And Julius replied solemnly:
I guess you re right.
Tommy suddenly pointed with a shaking hand.
What about that crevice there?
Julius replied in an awestricken voice:
That s it for sure.
They looked at each other.
When I was in France, said Tommy reminiscently, whenever my batman
failed to call me, he always said that he had come over queer. I never
believed it. But whether he felt it or not, there is such a sensation.
I ve got it now! Badly!
He looked at the rock with a kind of agonized passion.
Damn it! he cried. It s impossible! Five years! Think of it!
Bird s nesting boys, picnic parties, thousands of people passing! It
can t be there! It s a hundred to one against its being there! It s
against all reason!
Indeed, he felt it to be impossible more, perhaps, because he could not
believe in his own success where so many others had failed. The thing
was too easy, therefore it could not be. The hole would be empty.
Julius looked at him with a widening smile.
I guess you re rattled now all right, he drawled with some enjoyment.
Well, here goes! He thrust his hand into the crevice, and made a
slight grimace. It s a tight fit. Jane s hand must be a few sizes
smaller than mine. I don t feel anything no say, what s this? Gee
whiz! And with a flourish he waved aloft a small discoloured packet.
It s the goods all right. Sewn up in oilskin. Hold it while I get my
penknife.
The unbelievable had happened. Tommy held the precious packet tenderly
between his hands. They had succeeded!
It s queer, he murmured idly, you d think the stitches would have
rotted. They look just as good as new.
They cut them carefully and ripped away the oilskin. Inside was a small
folded sheet of paper. With trembling fingers they unfolded it. The
sheet was blank! They stared at each other, puzzled.
A dummy? hazarded Julius. Was Danvers just a decoy?
Tommy shook his head. That solution did not satisfy him. Suddenly his
face cleared.
I ve got it! Sympathetic ink!
You think so?
Worth trying anyhow. Heat usually does the trick. Get some sticks.
We ll make a fire.
In a few minutes the little fire of twigs and leaves was blazing
merrily. Tommy held the sheet of paper near the glow. The paper curled a
little with the heat. Nothing more.
Suddenly Julius grasped his arm, and pointed to where characters were
appearing in a faint brown colour.
Gee whiz! You ve got it! Say, that idea of yours was great. It never
occurred to me.
Tommy held the paper in position some minutes longer until he judged the
heat had done its work. Then he withdrew it. A moment later he uttered a
cry.
Across the sheet in neat brown printing ran the words: WITH THE
COMPLIMENTS OF MR. BROWN.
CHAPTER XXI. TOMMY MAKES A DISCOVERY
FOR a moment or two they stood staring at each other stupidly, dazed
with the shock. Somehow, inexplicably, Mr. Brown had forestalled them.
Tommy accepted defeat quietly. Not so Julius.
How in tarnation did he get ahead of us? That s what beats me! he
ended up.
Tommy shook his head, and said dully:
It accounts for the stitches being new. We might have guessed....
Never mind the darned stitches. How did he get ahead of us? We hustled
all we knew. It s downright impossible for anyone to get here quicker
than we did. And, anyway, how did he know? Do you reckon there was a
dictaphone in Jane s room? I guess there must have been.
But Tommy s common sense pointed out objections.
No one could have known beforehand that she was going to be in that
house much less that particular room.
That s so, admitted Julius. Then one of the nurses was a crook and
listened at the door. How s that?
I don t see that it matters anyway, said Tommy wearily. He may have
found out some months ago, and removed the papers, then No, by Jove,
that won t wash! They d have been published at once.
Sure thing they would! No, some one s got ahead of us to day by an hour
or so. But how they did it gets my goat.
I wish that chap Peel Edgerton had been with us, said Tommy
thoughtfully.
Why? Julius stared. The mischief was done when we came.
Yes Tommy hesitated. He could not explain his own feeling the
illogical idea that the K.C. s presence would somehow have averted the
catastrophe. He reverted to his former point of view. It s no good
arguing about how it was done. The game s up. We ve failed. There s only
one thing for me to do.
What s that?
Get back to London as soon as possible. Mr. Carter must be warned. It s
only a matter of hours now before the blow falls. But, at any rate, he
ought to know the worst.
The duty was an unpleasant one, but Tommy had no intention of shirking
it. He must report his failure to Mr. Carter. After that his work was
done. He took the midnight mail to London. Julius elected to stay the
night at Holyhead.
Half an hour after arrival, haggard and pale, Tommy stood before his
chief.
I ve come to report, sir. I ve failed failed badly.
Mr. Carter eyed him sharply.
You mean that the treaty
Is in the hands of Mr. Brown, sir.
Ah! said Mr. Carter quietly. The expression on his face did not
change, but Tommy caught the flicker of despair in his eyes. It
convinced him as nothing else had done that the outlook was hopeless.
Well, said Mr. Carter after a minute or two, we mustn t sag at the
knees, I suppose. I m glad to know definitely. We must do what we can.
Through Tommy s mind flashed the assurance: It s hopeless, and he knows
it s hopeless!
The other looked up at him.
Don t take it to heart, lad, he said kindly. You did your best. You
were up against one of the biggest brains of the century. And you came
very near success. Remember that.
Thank you, sir. It s awfully decent of you.
I blame myself. I have been blaming myself ever since I heard this
other news.
Something in his tone attracted Tommy s attention. A new fear gripped at
his heart.
Is there something more, sir?
I m afraid so, said Mr. Carter gravely. He stretched out his hand to a
sheet on the table.
Tuppence ? faltered Tommy.
Read for yourself.
The typewritten words danced before his eyes. The description of a green
toque, a coat with a handkerchief in the pocket marked P.L.C. He looked
an agonized question at Mr. Carter. The latter replied to it:
Washed up on the Yorkshire coast near Ebury. I m afraid it looks very
much like foul play.
My God! gasped Tommy. Tuppence! Those devils I ll never rest till
I ve got even with them! I ll hunt them down! I ll
The pity on Mr. Carter s face stopped him.
I know what you feel like, my poor boy. But it s no good. You ll waste
your strength uselessly. It may sound harsh, but my advice to you is:
Cut your losses. Time s merciful. You ll forget.
Forget Tuppence? Never!
Mr. Carter shook his head.
So you think now. Well, it won t bear thinking of that brave little
girl! I m sorry about the whole business confoundedly sorry.
Tommy came to himself with a start.
I m taking up your time, sir, he said with an effort. There s no need
for you to blame yourself. I dare say we were a couple of young fools to
take on such a job. You warned us all right. But I wish to God I d been
the one to get it in the neck. Good bye, sir.
Back at the Ritz , Tommy packed up his few belongings mechanically,
his thoughts far away. He was still bewildered by the introduction of
tragedy into his cheerful commonplace existence. What fun they had
had together, he and Tuppence! And now oh, he couldn t believe it it
couldn t be true! Tuppence dead! Little Tuppence, brimming over with
life! It was a dream, a horrible dream. Nothing more.
They brought him a note, a few kind words of sympathy from Peel
Edgerton, who had read the news in the paper. There had been a large
headline: EX V.A.D. FEARED DROWNED. The letter ended with the offer
of a post on a ranch in the Argentine, where Sir James had considerable
interests.
Kind old beggar, muttered Tommy, as he flung it aside.
The door opened, and Julius burst in with his usual violence. He held an
open newspaper in his hand.
Say, what s all this? They seem to have got some fool idea about
Tuppence.
It s true, said Tommy quietly.
You mean they ve done her in?
Tommy nodded.
I suppose when they got the treaty she wasn t any good to them any
longer, and they were afraid to let her go.
Well, I m darned! said Julius. Little Tuppence. She sure was the
pluckiest little girl
But suddenly something seemed to crack in Tommy s brain. He rose to his
feet.
Oh, get out! You don t really care, damn you! You asked her to marry
you in your rotten cold blooded way, but I loved her. I d have given
the soul out of my body to save her from harm. I d have stood by without
a word and let her marry you, because you could have given her the sort
of time she ought to have had, and I was only a poor devil without a
penny to bless himself with. But it wouldn t have been because I didn t
care!
See here, began Julius temperately.
Oh, go to the devil! I can t stand your coming here and talking about
little Tuppence. Go and look after your cousin. Tuppence is my girl!
I ve always loved her, from the time we played together as kids. We
grew up and it was just the same. I shall never forget when I was in
hospital, and she came in in that ridiculous cap and apron! It was like
a miracle to see the girl I loved turn up in a nurse s kit
But Julius interrupted him.
A nurse s kit! Gee whiz! I must be going to Colney Hatch! I could swear
I ve seen Jane in a nurse s cap too. And that s plumb impossible! No,
by gum, I ve got it! It was her I saw talking to Whittington at that
nursing home in Bournemouth. She wasn t a patient there! She was a
nurse!
I dare say, said Tommy angrily, she s probably been in with them from
the start. I shouldn t wonder if she stole those papers from Danvers to
begin with.
I m darned if she did! shouted Julius. She s my cousin, and as
patriotic a girl as ever stepped.
I don t care a damn what she is, but get out of here! retorted Tommy
also at the top of his voice.
The young men were on the point of coming to blows. But suddenly, with
an almost magical abruptness, Julius s anger abated.
All right, son, he said quietly, I m going. I don t blame you any for
what you ve been saying. It s mighty lucky you did say it. I ve been
the most almighty blithering darned idiot that it s possible to imagine.
Calm down Tommy had made an impatient gesture I m going right away
now going to the London and North Western Railway depot, if you want to
know.
I don t care a damn where you re going, growled Tommy.
As the door closed behind Julius, he returned to his suit case.
That s the lot, he murmured, and rang the bell.
Take my luggage down.
Yes, sir. Going away, sir?
I m going to the devil, said Tommy, regardless of the menial s
feelings.
That functionary, however, merely replied respectfully:
Yes, sir. Shall I call a taxi?
Tommy nodded.
Where was he going? He hadn t the faintest idea. Beyond a fixed
determination to get even with Mr. Brown he had no plans. He re read Sir
James s letter, and shook his head. Tuppence must be avenged. Still, it
was kind of the old fellow.
Better answer it, I suppose. He went across to the writing table.
With the usual perversity of bedroom stationery, there were innumerable
envelopes and no paper. He rang. No one came. Tommy fumed at the
delay. Then he remembered that there was a good supply in Julius s
sitting room. The American had announced his immediate departure, there
would be no fear of running up against him. Besides, he wouldn t mind if
he did. He was beginning to be rather ashamed of the things he had said.
Old Julius had taken them jolly well. He d apologize if he found him
there.
But the room was deserted. Tommy walked across to the writing table,
and opened the middle drawer. A photograph, carelessly thrust in face
upwards, caught his eye. For a moment he stood rooted to the ground.
Then he took it out, shut the drawer, walked slowly over to an
arm chair, and sat down still staring at the photograph in his hand.
What on earth was a photograph of the French girl Annette doing in
Julius Hersheimmer s writing table?
CHAPTER XXII. IN DOWNING STREET
THE Prime Minister tapped the desk in front of him with nervous fingers.
His face was worn and harassed. He took up his conversation with Mr.
Carter at the point it had broken off. I don t understand, he said.
Do you really mean that things are not so desperate after all?
So this lad seems to think.
Let s have a look at his letter again.
Mr. Carter handed it over. It was written in a sprawling boyish hand.
DEAR MR. CARTER,
Something s turned up that has given me a jar. Of course I may be
simply making an awful ass of myself, but I don t think so. If my
conclusions are right, that girl at Manchester was just a plant. The
whole thing was prearranged, sham packet and all, with the object of
making us think the game was up therefore I fancy that we must have
been pretty hot on the scent.
I think I know who the real Jane Finn is, and I ve even got an idea
where the papers are. That last s only a guess, of course, but I ve a
sort of feeling it ll turn out right. Anyhow, I enclose it in a sealed
envelope for what it s worth. I m going to ask you not to open it until
the very last moment, midnight on the 28th, in fact. You ll understand
why in a minute. You see, I ve figured it out that those things of
Tuppence s are a plant too, and she s no more drowned than I am. The way
I reason is this: as a last chance they ll let Jane Finn escape in
the hope that she s been shamming this memory stunt, and that once she
thinks she s free she ll go right away to the cache. Of course it s
an awful risk for them to take, because she knows all about them but
they re pretty desperate to get hold of that treaty. But if they know
that the papers have been recovered by us , neither of those two girls
lives will be worth an hour s purchase. I must try and get hold of
Tuppence before Jane escapes.
I want a repeat of that telegram that was sent to Tuppence at the
Ritz . Sir James Peel Edgerton said you would be able to manage that
for me. He s frightfully clever.
One last thing please have that house in Soho watched day and night.
Yours, etc.,
THOMAS BERESFORD.
The Prime Minister looked up.
The enclosure?
Mr. Carter smiled dryly.
In the vaults of the Bank. I am taking no chances.
You don t think the Prime Minister hesitated a minute that it would
be better to open it now? Surely we ought to secure the document, that
is, provided the young man s guess turns out to be correct, at once. We
can keep the fact of having done so quite secret.
Can we? I m not so sure. There are spies all round us. Once it s known
I wouldn t give that he snapped his fingers for the life of those
two girls. No, the boy trusted me, and I shan t let him down.
Well, well, we must leave it at that, then. What s he like, this lad?
Outwardly, he s an ordinary clean limbed, rather block headed young
Englishman. Slow in his mental processes. On the other hand, it s quite
impossible to lead him astray through his imagination. He hasn t got
any so he s difficult to deceive. He worries things out slowly, and
once he s got hold of anything he doesn t let go. The little lady s
quite different. More intuition and less common sense. They make a
pretty pair working together. Pace and stamina.
He seems confident, mused the Prime Minister.
Yes, and that s what gives me hope. He s the kind of diffident youth
who would have to be very sure before he ventured an opinion at all.
A half smile came to the other s lips.
And it is this boy who will defeat the master criminal of our time?
This boy, as you say! But I sometimes fancy I see a shadow behind.
You mean?
Peel Edgerton.
Peel Edgerton? said the Prime Minister in astonishment.
Yes. I see his hand in this . He struck the open letter. He s
there working in the dark, silently, unobtrusively. I ve always felt
that if anyone was to run Mr. Brown to earth, Peel Edgerton would be the
man. I tell you he s on the case now, but doesn t want it known. By the
way, I got rather an odd request from him the other day.
Yes?
He sent me a cutting from some American paper. It referred to a man s
body found near the docks in New York about three weeks ago. He asked me
to collect any information on the subject I could.
Well?
Carter shrugged his shoulders.
I couldn t get much. Young fellow about thirty five poorly
dressed face very badly disfigured. He was never identified.
And you fancy that the two matters are connected in some way?
Somehow I do. I may be wrong, of course.
There was a pause, then Mr. Carter continued:
I asked him to come round here. Not that we ll get anything out of him
he doesn t want to tell. His legal instincts are too strong. But there s
no doubt he can throw light on one or two obscure points in young
Beresford s letter. Ah, here he is!
The two men rose to greet the new comer. A half whimsical thought
flashed across the Premier s mind. My successor, perhaps!
We ve had a letter from young Beresford, said Mr. Carter, coming to
the point at once. You ve seen him, I suppose?
You suppose wrong, said the lawyer.
Oh! Mr. Carter was a little nonplussed.
Sir James smiled, and stroked his chin.
He rang me up, he volunteered.
Would you have any objection to telling us exactly what passed between
you?
Not at all. He thanked me for a certain letter which I had written to
him as a matter of fact, I had offered him a job. Then he reminded
me of something I had said to him at Manchester respecting that bogus
telegram which lured Miss Cowley away. I asked him if anything untoward
had occurred. He said it had that in a drawer in Mr. Hersheimmer s room
he had discovered a photograph. The lawyer paused, then continued: I
asked him if the photograph bore the name and address of a Californian
photographer. He replied: You re on to it, sir. It had. Then he went
on to tell me something I didn t know. The original of that photograph
was the French girl, Annette, who saved his life.
What?
Exactly. I asked the young man with some curiosity what he had done
with the photograph. He replied that he had put it back where he found
it. The lawyer paused again. That was good, you know distinctly
good. He can use his brains, that young fellow. I congratulated him. The
discovery was a providential one. Of course, from the moment that the
girl in Manchester was proved to be a plant everything was altered.
Young Beresford saw that for himself without my having to tell it
him. But he felt he couldn t trust his judgment on the subject of
Miss Cowley. Did I think she was alive? I told him, duly weighing the
evidence, that there was a very decided chance in favour of it. That
brought us back to the telegram.
Yes?
I advised him to apply to you for a copy of the original wire. It
had occurred to me as probable that, after Miss Cowley flung it on the
floor, certain words might have been erased and altered with the express
intention of setting searchers on a false trail.
Carter nodded. He took a sheet from his pocket, and read aloud:
Come at once, Astley Priors, Gatehouse, Kent. Great
developments TOMMY.
Very simple, said Sir James, and very ingenious. Just a few words
to alter, and the thing was done. And the one important clue they
overlooked.
What was that?
The page boy s statement that Miss Cowley drove to Charing Cross. They
were so sure of themselves that they took it for granted he had made a
mistake.
Then young Beresford is now?
At Gatehouse, Kent, unless I am much mistaken.
Mr. Carter looked at him curiously.
I rather wonder you re not there too, Peel Edgerton?
Ah, I m busy on a case.
I thought you were on your holiday?
Oh, I ve not been briefed. Perhaps it would be more correct to say I m
preparing a case. Any more facts about that American chap for me?
I m afraid not. Is it important to find out who he was?
Oh, I know who he was, said Sir James easily. I can t prove it
yet but I know.
The other two asked no questions. They had an instinct that it would be
mere waste of breath.
But what I don t understand, said the Prime Minister suddenly, is how
that photograph came to be in Mr. Hersheimmer s drawer?
Perhaps it never left it, suggested the lawyer gently.
But the bogus inspector? Inspector Brown?
Ah! said Sir James thoughtfully. He rose to his feet. I mustn t keep
you. Go on with the affairs of the nation. I must get back to my case.
Two days later Julius Hersheimmer returned from Manchester. A note from
Tommy lay on his table:
DEAR HERSHEIMMER,
Sorry I lost my temper. In case I don t see you again, good bye. I ve
been offered a job in the Argentine, and might as well take it.
Yours,
TOMMY BERESFORD.
A peculiar smile lingered for a moment on Julius s face. He threw the
letter into the waste paper basket.
The darned fool! he murmured.
CHAPTER XXIII. A RACE AGAINST TIME
AFTER ringing up Sir James, Tommy s next procedure was to make a call
at South Audley Mansions. He found Albert discharging his professional
duties, and introduced himself without more ado as a friend of
Tuppence s. Albert unbent immediately.
Things has been very quiet here lately, he said wistfully. Hope the
young lady s keeping well, sir?
That s just the point, Albert. She s disappeared.
You don t mean as the crooks have got her?
They have.
In the Underworld?
No, dash it all, in this world!
It s a h expression, sir, explained Albert. At the pictures the
crooks always have a restoorant in the Underworld. But do you think as
they ve done her in, sir?
I hope not. By the way, have you by any chance an aunt, a cousin,
a grandmother, or any other suitable female relation who might be
represented as being likely to kick the bucket?
A delighted grin spread slowly over Albert s countenance.
I m on, sir. My poor aunt what lives in the country has been mortal bad
for a long time, and she s asking for me with her dying breath.
Tommy nodded approval.
Can you report this in the proper quarter and meet me at Charing Cross
in an hour s time?
I ll be there, sir. You can count on me.
As Tommy had judged, the faithful Albert proved an invaluable ally. The
two took up their quarters at the inn in Gatehouse. To Albert fell the
task of collecting information. There was no difficulty about it.
Astley Priors was the property of a Dr. Adams. The doctor no longer
practiced, had retired, the landlord believed, but he took a few private
patients here the good fellow tapped his forehead knowingly balmy
ones! You understand! The doctor was a popular figure in the village,
subscribed freely to all the local sports a very pleasant, affable
gentleman. Been there long? Oh, a matter of ten years or so might be
longer. Scientific gentleman, he was. Professors and people often came
down from town to see him. Anyway, it was a gay house, always visitors.
In the face of all this volubility, Tommy felt doubts. Was it possible
that this genial, well known figure could be in reality a dangerous
criminal? His life seemed so open and aboveboard. No hint of sinister
doings. Suppose it was all a gigantic mistake? Tommy felt a cold chill
at the thought.
Then he remembered the private patients balmy ones. He inquired
carefully if there was a young lady amongst them, describing Tuppence.
But nothing much seemed to be known about the patients they were seldom
seen outside the grounds. A guarded description of Annette also failed
to provoke recognition.
Astley Priors was a pleasant red brick edifice, surrounded by
well wooded grounds which effectually shielded the house from
observation from the road.
On the first evening Tommy, accompanied by Albert, explored the grounds.
Owing to Albert s insistence they dragged themselves along painfully on
their stomachs, thereby producing a great deal more noise than if
they had stood upright. In any case, these precautions were totally
unnecessary. The grounds, like those of any other private house after
nightfall, seemed untenanted. Tommy had imagined a possible fierce
watchdog. Albert s fancy ran to a puma, or a tame cobra. But they
reached a shrubbery near the house quite unmolested.
The blinds of the dining room window were up. There was a large company
assembled round the table. The port was passing from hand to hand. It
seemed a normal, pleasant company. Through the open window scraps of
conversation floated out disjointedly on the night air. It was a heated
discussion on county cricket!
Again Tommy felt that cold chill of uncertainty. It seemed impossible
to believe that these people were other than they seemed. Had he been
fooled once more? The fair bearded, spectacled gentleman who sat at the
head of the table looked singularly honest and normal.
Tommy slept badly that night. The following morning the indefatigable
Albert, having cemented an alliance with the greengrocer s boy, took the
latter s place and ingratiated himself with the cook at Malthouse.
He returned with the information that she was undoubtedly one of
the crooks, but Tommy mistrusted the vividness of his imagination.
Questioned, he could adduce nothing in support of his statement except
his own opinion that she wasn t the usual kind. You could see that at a
glance.
The substitution being repeated much to the pecuniary advantage of the
real greengrocer s boy on the following day, Albert brought back the
first piece of hopeful news. There was a French young lady staying
in the house. Tommy put his doubts aside. Here was confirmation of
his theory. But time pressed. To day was the 27th. The 29th was the
much talked of Labour Day, about which all sorts of rumours were
running riot. Newspapers were getting agitated. Sensational hints of a
Labour coup d tat were freely reported. The Government said nothing.
It knew and was prepared. There were rumours of dissension among the
Labour leaders. They were not of one mind. The more far seeing among
them realized that what they proposed might well be a death blow to the
England that at heart they loved. They shrank from the starvation and
misery a general strike would entail, and were willing to meet the
Government half way. But behind them were subtle, insistent forces at
work, urging the memories of old wrongs, deprecating the weakness of
half and half measures, fomenting misunderstandings.
Tommy felt that, thanks to Mr. Carter, he understood the position fairly
accurately. With the fatal document in the hands of Mr. Brown,
public opinion would swing to the side of the Labour extremists and
revolutionists. Failing that, the battle was an even chance. The
Government with a loyal army and police force behind them might
win but at a cost of great suffering. But Tommy nourished another and
a preposterous dream. With Mr. Brown unmasked and captured he
believed, rightly or wrongly, that the whole organization would crumble
ignominiously and instantaneously. The strange permeating influence
of the unseen chief held it together. Without him, Tommy believed an
instant panic would set in; and, the honest men left to themselves, an
eleventh hour reconciliation would be possible.
This is a one man show, said Tommy to himself. The thing to do is to
get hold of the man.
It was partly in furtherance of this ambitious design that he had
requested Mr. Carter not to open the sealed envelope. The draft
treaty was Tommy s bait. Every now and then he was aghast at his own
presumption. How dared he think that he had discovered what so many
wiser and clever men had overlooked? Nevertheless, he stuck tenaciously
to his idea.
That evening he and Albert once more penetrated the grounds of Astley
Priors. Tommy s ambition was somehow or other to gain admission to the
house itself. As they approached cautiously, Tommy gave a sudden gasp.
On the second floor window some one standing between the window and
the light in the room threw a silhouette on the blind. It was one Tommy
would have recognized anywhere! Tuppence was in that house!
He clutched Albert by the shoulder.
Stay here! When I begin to sing, watch that window.
He retreated hastily to a position on the main drive, and began in a
deep roar, coupled with an unsteady gait, the following ditty:
I am a Soldier
A jolly British Soldier;
You can see that I m a Soldier by my feet....
It had been a favourite on the gramophone in Tuppence s hospital days.
He did not doubt but that she would recognize it and draw her own
conclusions. Tommy had not a note of music in his voice, but his lungs
were excellent. The noise he produced was terrific.
Presently an unimpeachable butler, accompanied by an equally
unimpeachable footman, issued from the front door. The butler
remonstrated with him. Tommy continued to sing, addressing the butler
affectionately as dear old whiskers. The footman took him by one arm,
the butler by the other. They ran him down the drive, and neatly out
of the gate. The butler threatened him with the police if he intruded
again. It was beautifully done soberly and with perfect decorum. Anyone
would have sworn that the butler was a real butler, the footman a real
footman only, as it happened, the butler was Whittington!
Tommy retired to the inn and waited for Albert s return. At last that
worthy made his appearance.
Well? cried Tommy eagerly.
It s all right. While they was a running of you out the window opened,
and something was chucked out. He handed a scrap of paper to Tommy. It
was wrapped round a letterweight.
On the paper were scrawled three words: To morrow same time.
Good egg! cried Tommy. We re getting going.
I wrote a message on a piece of paper, wrapped it round a stone, and
chucked it through the window, continued Albert breathlessly.
Tommy groaned.
Your zeal will be the undoing of us, Albert. What did you say?
Said we was a staying at the inn. If she could get away, to come there
and croak like a frog.
She ll know that s you, said Tommy with a sigh of relief. Your
imagination runs away with you, you know, Albert. Why, you wouldn t
recognize a frog croaking if you heard it.
Albert looked rather crest fallen.
Cheer up, said Tommy. No harm done. That butler s an old friend of
mine I bet he knew who I was, though he didn t let on. It s not their
game to show suspicion. That s why we ve found it fairly plain sailing.
They don t want to discourage me altogether. On the other hand, they
don t want to make it too easy. I m a pawn in their game, Albert, that s
what I am. You see, if the spider lets the fly walk out too easily,
the fly might suspect it was a put up job. Hence the usefulness of that
promising youth, Mr. T. Beresford, who s blundered in just at the right
moment for them. But later, Mr. T. Beresford had better look out!
Tommy retired for the night in a state of some elation. He had
elaborated a careful plan for the following evening. He felt sure that
the inhabitants of Astley Priors would not interfere with him up to
a certain point. It was after that that Tommy proposed to give them a
surprise.
About twelve o clock, however, his calm was rudely shaken. He was told
that some one was demanding him in the bar. The applicant proved to be a
rude looking carter well coated with mud.
Well, my good fellow, what is it? asked Tommy.
Might this be for you, sir? The carter held out a very dirty folded
note, on the outside of which was written: Take this to the gentleman
at the inn near Astley Priors. He will give you ten shillings.
The handwriting was Tuppence s. Tommy appreciated her quick wittedness
in realizing that he might be staying at the inn under an assumed name.
He snatched at it.
That s all right.
The man withheld it.
What about my ten shillings?
Tommy hastily produced a ten shilling note, and the man relinquished his
find. Tommy unfastened it.
DEAR TOMMY,
I knew it was you last night. Don t go this evening. They ll be lying
in wait for you. They re taking us away this morning. I heard something
about Wales Holyhead, I think. I ll drop this on the road if I get a
chance. Annette told me how you d escaped. Buck up.
Yours,
TWOPENCE.
Tommy raised a shout for Albert before he had even finished perusing
this characteristic epistle.
Pack my bag! We re off!
Yes, sir. The boots of Albert could be heard racing upstairs.
Holyhead? Did that mean that, after all Tommy was puzzled. He read
on slowly.
The boots of Albert continued to be active on the floor above.
Suddenly a second shout came from below.
Albert! I m a damned fool! Unpack that bag!
Yes, sir.
Tommy smoothed out the note thoughtfully.
Yes, a damned fool, he said softly. But so s some one else! And at
last I know who it is!
CHAPTER XXIV. JULIUS TAKES A HAND
IN his suite at Claridge s, Kramenin reclined on a couch and dictated to
his secretary in sibilant Russian.
Presently the telephone at the secretary s elbow purred, and he took up
the receiver, spoke for a minute or two, then turned to his employer.
Some one below is asking for you.
Who is it?
He gives the name of Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer.
Hersheimmer, repeated Kramenin thoughtfully. I have heard that name
before.
His father was one of the steel kings of America, explained the
secretary, whose business it was to know everything. This young man
must be a millionaire several times over.
The other s eyes narrowed appreciatively.
You had better go down and see him, Ivan. Find out what he wants.
The secretary obeyed, closing the door noiselessly behind him. In a few
minutes he returned.
He declines to state his business says it is entirely private and
personal, and that he must see you.
A millionaire several times over, murmured Kramenin. Bring him up, my
dear Ivan.
The secretary left the room once more, and returned escorting Julius.
Monsieur Kramenin? said the latter abruptly.
The Russian, studying him attentively with his pale venomous eyes,
bowed.
Pleased to meet you, said the American. I ve got some very important
business I d like to talk over with you, if I can see you alone. He
looked pointedly at the other.
My secretary, Monsieur Grieber, from whom I have no secrets.
That may be so but I have, said Julius dryly. So I d be obliged if
you d tell him to scoot.
Ivan, said the Russian softly, perhaps you would not mind retiring
into the next room
The next room won t do, interrupted Julius. I know these ducal
suites and I want this one plumb empty except for you and me. Send him
round to a store to buy a penn orth of peanuts.
Though not particularly enjoying the American s free and easy manner
of speech, Kramenin was devoured by curiosity. Will your business take
long to state?
Might be an all night job if you caught on.
Very good, Ivan. I shall not require you again this evening. Go to the
theatre take a night off.
Thank you, your excellency.
The secretary bowed and departed.
Julius stood at the door watching his retreat. Finally, with a satisfied
sigh, he closed it, and came back to his position in the centre of the
room.
Now, Mr. Hersheimmer, perhaps you will be so kind as to come to the
point?
I guess that won t take a minute, drawled Julius. Then, with an abrupt
change of manner: Hands up or I shoot!
For a moment Kramenin stared blindly into the big automatic, then, with
almost comical haste, he flung up his hands above his head. In that
instant Julius had taken his measure. The man he had to deal with was an
abject physical coward the rest would be easy.
This is an outrage, cried the Russian in a high hysterical voice. An
outrage! Do you mean to kill me?
Not if you keep your voice down. Don t go edging sideways towards that
bell. That s better.
What do you want? Do nothing rashly. Remember my life is of the utmost
value to my country. I may have been maligned
I reckon, said Julius, that the man who let daylight into you would
be doing humanity a good turn. But you needn t worry any. I m not
proposing to kill you this trip that is, if you re reasonable.
The Russian quailed before the stern menace in the other s eyes. He
passed his tongue over his dry lips.
What do you want? Money?
No. I want Jane Finn.
Jane Finn? I never heard of her!
You re a darned liar! You know perfectly who I mean.
I tell you I ve never heard of the girl.
And I tell you, retorted Julius, that Little Willie here is just
hopping mad to go off!
The Russian wilted visibly.
You wouldn t dare
Oh, yes, I would, son!
Kramenin must have recognized something in the voice that carried
conviction, for he said sullenly:
Well? Granted I do know who you mean what of it?
You will tell me now right here where she is to be found.
Kramenin shook his head.
I daren t.
Why not?
I daren t. You ask an impossibility.
Afraid, eh? Of whom? Mr. Brown? Ah, that tickles you up! There is such
a person, then? I doubted it. And the mere mention of him scares you
stiff!
I have seen him, said the Russian slowly. Spoken to him face to face.
I did not know it until afterwards. He was one of a crowd. I should not
know him again. Who is he really? I do not know. But I know this he is
a man to fear.
He ll never know, said Julius.
He knows everything and his vengeance is swift. Even
I Kramenin! would not be exempt!
Then you won t do as I ask you?
You ask an impossibility.
Sure that s a pity for you, said Julius cheerfully. But the world in
general will benefit. He raised the revolver.
Stop, shrieked the Russian. You cannot mean to shoot me?
Of course I do. I ve always heard you Revolutionists held life cheap,
but it seems there s a difference when it s your own life in question.
I gave you just one chance of saving your dirty skin, and that you
wouldn t take!
They would kill me!
Well, said Julius pleasantly, it s up to you. But I ll just say this.
Little Willie here is a dead cert, and if I was you I d take a sporting
chance with Mr. Brown!
You will hang if you shoot me, muttered the Russian irresolutely.
No, stranger, that s where you re wrong. You forget the dollars. A
big crowd of solicitors will get busy, and they ll get some high brow
doctors on the job, and the end of it all will be that they ll say my
brain was unhinged. I shall spend a few months in a quiet sanatorium, my
mental health will improve, the doctors will declare me sane again, and
all will end happily for little Julius. I guess I can bear a few months
retirement in order to rid the world of you, but don t you kid yourself
I ll hang for it!
The Russian believed him. Corrupt himself, he believed implicitly in the
power of money. He had read of American murder trials running much on
the lines indicated by Julius. He had bought and sold justice himself.
This virile young American, with the significant drawling voice, had the
whip hand of him.
I m going to count five, continued Julius, and I guess, if you let me
get past four, you needn t worry any about Mr. Brown. Maybe he ll send
some flowers to the funeral, but you won t smell them! Are you ready?
I ll begin. One two three four
The Russian interrupted with a shriek:
Do not shoot. I will do all you wish.
Julius lowered the revolver.
I thought you d hear sense. Where is the girl?
At Gatehouse, in Kent. Astley Priors, the place is called.
Is she a prisoner there?
She s not allowed to leave the house though it s safe enough really.
The little fool has lost her memory, curse her!
That s been annoying for you and your friends, I reckon. What about the
other girl, the one you decoyed away over a week ago?
She s there too, said the Russian sullenly.
That s good, said Julius. Isn t it all panning out beautifully? And a
lovely night for the run!
What run? demanded Kramenin, with a stare.
Down to Gatehouse, sure. I hope you re fond of motoring?
What do you mean? I refuse to go.
Now don t get mad. You must see I m not such a kid as to leave you
here. You d ring up your friends on that telephone first thing! Ah! He
observed the fall on the other s face. You see, you d got it all fixed.
No, sir, you re coming along with me. This your bedroom next door here?
Walk right in. Little Willie and I will come behind. Put on a thick
coat, that s right. Fur lined? And you a Socialist! Now we re ready. We
walk downstairs and out through the hall to where my car s waiting. And
don t you forget I ve got you covered every inch of the way. I can shoot
just as well through my coat pocket. One word, or a glance even, at one
of those liveried menials, and there ll sure be a strange face in the
Sulphur and Brimstone Works!
Together they descended the stairs, and passed out to the waiting car.
The Russian was shaking with rage. The hotel servants surrounded them.
A cry hovered on his lips, but at the last minute his nerve failed him.
The American was a man of his word.
When they reached the car, Julius breathed a sigh of relief. The
danger zone was passed. Fear had successfully hypnotized the man by his
side.
Get in, he ordered. Then as he caught the other s sidelong glance,
No, the chauffeur won t help you any. Naval man. Was on a submarine in
Russia when the Revolution broke out. A brother of his was murdered by
your people. George!
Yes, sir? The chauffeur turned his head.
This gentleman is a Russian Bolshevik. We don t want to shoot him, but
it may be necessary. You understand?
Perfectly, sir.
I want to go to Gatehouse in Kent. Know the road at all?
Yes, sir, it will be about an hour and a half s run.
Make it an hour. I m in a hurry.
I ll do my best, sir. The car shot forward through the traffic.
Julius ensconced himself comfortably by the side of his victim. He kept
his hand in the pocket of his coat, but his manner was urbane to the
last degree.
There was a man I shot once in Arizona he began cheerfully.
At the end of the hour s run the unfortunate Kramenin was more dead than
alive. In succession to the anecdote of the Arizona man, there had been
a tough from Frisco, and an episode in the Rockies. Julius s narrative
style, if not strictly accurate, was picturesque!
Slowing down, the chauffeur called over his shoulder that they were just
coming into Gatehouse. Julius bade the Russian direct them. His plan was
to drive straight up to the house. There Kramenin was to ask for the two
girls. Julius explained to him that Little Willie would not be tolerant
of failure. Kramenin, by this time, was as putty in the other s hands.
The terrific pace they had come had still further unmanned him. He had
given himself up for dead at every corner.
The car swept up the drive, and stopped before the porch. The chauffeur
looked round for orders.
Turn the car first, George. Then ring the bell, and get back to your
place. Keep the engine going, and be ready to scoot like hell when I
give the word.
Very good, sir.
The front door was opened by the butler. Kramenin felt the muzzle of the
revolver pressed against his ribs.
Now, hissed Julius. And be careful.
The Russian beckoned. His lips were white, and his voice was not very
steady:
It is I Kramenin! Bring down the girl at once! There is no time to
lose!
Whittington had come down the steps. He uttered an exclamation of
astonishment at seeing the other.
You! What s up? Surely you know the plan
Kramenin interrupted him, using the words that have created many
unnecessary panics:
We have been betrayed! Plans must be abandoned. We must save our own
skins. The girl! And at once! It s our only chance.
Whittington hesitated, but for hardly a moment.
You have orders from him?
Naturally! Should I be here otherwise? Hurry! There is no time to be
lost. The other little fool had better come too.
Whittington turned and ran back into the house. The agonizing minutes
went by. Then two figures hastily huddled in cloaks appeared on the
steps and were hustled into the car. The smaller of the two was inclined
to resist and Whittington shoved her in unceremoniously. Julius leaned
forward, and in doing so the light from the open door lit up his face.
Another man on the steps behind Whittington gave a startled exclamation.
Concealment was at an end.
Get a move on, George, shouted Julius.
The chauffeur slipped in his clutch, and with a bound the car started.
The man on the steps uttered an oath. His hand went to his pocket. There
was a flash and a report. The bullet just missed the taller girl by an
inch.
Get down, Jane, cried Julius. Flat on the bottom of the car. He
thrust her sharply forward, then standing up, he took careful aim and
fired.
Have you hit him? cried Tuppence eagerly.
Sure, replied Julius. He isn t killed, though. Skunks like that take
a lot of killing. Are you all right, Tuppence?
Of course I am. Where s Tommy? And who s this? She indicated the
shivering Kramenin.
Tommy s making tracks for the Argentine. I guess he thought you d
turned up your toes. Steady through the gate, George! That s right.
It ll take em at least five minutes to get busy after us. They ll use
the telephone, I guess, so look out for snares ahead and don t take the
direct route. Who s this, did you say, Tuppence? Let me present Monsieur
Kramenin. I persuaded him to come on the trip for his health.
The Russian remained mute, still livid with terror.
But what made them let us go? demanded Tuppence suspiciously.
I reckon Monsieur Kramenin here asked them so prettily they just
couldn t refuse!
This was too much for the Russian. He burst out vehemently:
Curse you curse you! They know now that I betrayed them. My life won t
be safe for an hour in this country.
That s so, assented Julius. I d advise you to make tracks for Russia
right away.
Let me go, then, cried the other. I have done what you asked. Why do
you still keep me with you?
Not for the pleasure of your company. I guess you can get right off now
if you want to. I thought you d rather I tooled you back to London.
You may never reach London, snarled the other. Let me go here and
now.
Sure thing. Pull up, George. The gentleman s not making the return
trip. If I ever come to Russia, Monsieur Kramenin, I shall expect a
rousing welcome, and
But before Julius had finished his speech, and before the car had
finally halted, the Russian had swung himself out and disappeared into
the night.
Just a mite impatient to leave us, commented Julius, as the car
gathered way again. And no idea of saying good bye politely to the
ladies. Say, Jane, you can get up on the seat now.
For the first time the girl spoke.
How did you persuade him? she asked.
Julius tapped his revolver.
Little Willie here takes the credit!
Splendid! cried the girl. The colour surged into her face, her eyes
looked admiringly at Julius.
Annette and I didn t know what was going to happen to us, said
Tuppence. Old Whittington hurried us off. We thought it was lambs to
the slaughter.
Annette, said Julius. Is that what you call her?
His mind seemed to be trying to adjust itself to a new idea.
It s her name, said Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide.
Shucks! retorted Julius. She may think it s her name, because her
memory s gone, poor kid. But it s the one real and original Jane Finn
we ve got here.
What? cried Tuppence.
But she was interrupted. With an angry spurt, a bullet embedded itself
in the upholstery of the car just behind her head.
Down with you, cried Julius. It s an ambush. These guys have got busy
pretty quickly. Push her a bit, George.
The car fairly leapt forward. Three more shots rang out, but went
happily wide. Julius, upright, leant over the back of the car.
Nothing to shoot at, he announced gloomily. But I guess there ll be
another little picnic soon. Ah!
He raised his hand to his cheek.
You are hurt? said Annette quickly.
Only a scratch.
The girl sprang to her feet.
Let me out! Let me out, I say! Stop the car. It is me they re after.
I m the one they want. You shall not lose your lives because of me. Let
me go. She was fumbling with the fastenings of the door.
Julius took her by both arms, and looked at her. She had spoken with no
trace of foreign accent.
Sit down, kid, he said gently. I guess there s nothing wrong with
your memory. Been fooling them all the time, eh?
The girl looked at him, nodded, and then suddenly burst into tears.
Julius patted her on the shoulder.
There, there just you sit tight. We re not going to let you quit.
Through her sobs the girl said indistinctly:
You re from home. I can tell by your voice. It makes me home sick.
Sure I m from home. I m your cousin Julius Hersheimmer. I came over to
Europe on purpose to find you and a pretty dance you ve led me.
The car slackened speed. George spoke over his shoulder:
Cross roads here, sir. I m not sure of the way.
The car slowed down till it hardly moved. As it did so a figure climbed
suddenly over the back, and plunged head first into the midst of them.
Sorry, said Tommy, extricating himself.
A mass of confused exclamations greeted him. He replied to them
severally:
Was in the bushes by the drive. Hung on behind. Couldn t let you know
before at the pace you were going. It was all I could do to hang on. Now
then, you girls, get out!
Get out?
Yes. There s a station just up that road. Train due in three minutes.
You ll catch it if you hurry.
What the devil are you driving at? demanded Julius. Do you think you
can fool them by leaving the car?
You and I aren t going to leave the car. Only the girls.
You re crazed, Beresford. Stark staring mad! You can t let those girls
go off alone. It ll be the end of it if you do.
Tommy turned to Tuppence.
Get out at once, Tuppence. Take her with you, and do just as I say.
No one will do you any harm. You re safe. Take the train to London. Go
straight to Sir James Peel Edgerton. Mr. Carter lives out of town, but
you ll be safe with him.
Darn you! cried Julius. You re mad. Jane, you stay where you are.
With a sudden swift movement, Tommy snatched the revolver from Julius s
hand, and levelled it at him.
Now will you believe I m in earnest? Get out, both of you, and do as I
say or I ll shoot!
Tuppence sprang out, dragging the unwilling Jane after her.
Come on, it s all right. If Tommy s sure he s sure. Be quick. We ll
miss the train.
They started running.
Julius s pent up rage burst forth.
What the hell
Tommy interrupted him.
Dry up! I want a few words with you, Mr. Julius Hersheimmer.
CHAPTER XXV. JANE S STORY
HER arm through Jane s, dragging her along, Tuppence reached the
station. Her quick ears caught the sound of the approaching train.
Hurry up, she panted, or we ll miss it.
They arrived on the platform just as the train came to a standstill.
Tuppence opened the door of an empty first class compartment, and the
two girls sank down breathless on the padded seats.
A man looked in, then passed on to the next carriage. Jane started
nervously. Her eyes dilated with terror. She looked questioningly at
Tuppence.
Is he one of them, do you think? she breathed.
Tuppence shook her head.
No, no. It s all right. She took Jane s hand in hers. Tommy wouldn t
have told us to do this unless he was sure we d be all right.
But he doesn t know them as I do! The girl shivered. You can t
understand. Five years! Five long years! Sometimes I thought I should go
mad.
Never mind. It s all over.
Is it?
The train was moving now, speeding through the night at a gradually
increasing rate. Suddenly Jane Finn started up.
What was that? I thought I saw a face looking in through the window.
No, there s nothing. See. Tuppence went to the window, and lifting the
strap let the pane down.
You re sure?
Quite sure.
The other seemed to feel some excuse was necessary:
I guess I m acting like a frightened rabbit, but I can t help it. If
they caught me now they d Her eyes opened wide and staring.
Don t! implored Tuppence. Lie back, and don t think . You can be
quite sure that Tommy wouldn t have said it was safe if it wasn t.
My cousin didn t think so. He didn t want us to do this.
No, said Tuppence, rather embarrassed.
What are you thinking of? said Jane sharply.
Why?
Your voice was so queer!
I was thinking of something, confessed Tuppence. But I don t want
to tell you not now. I may be wrong, but I don t think so. It s just
an idea that came into my head a long time ago. Tommy s got it too I m
almost sure he has. But don t you worry there ll be time enough for
that later. And it mayn t be so at all! Do what I tell you lie back and
don t think of anything.
I ll try. The long lashes drooped over the hazel eyes.
Tuppence, for her part, sat bolt upright much in the attitude of a
watchful terrier on guard. In spite of herself she was nervous. Her eyes
flashed continually from one window to the other. She noted the exact
position of the communication cord. What it was that she feared, she
would have been hard put to it to say. But in her own mind she was
far from feeling the confidence displayed in her words. Not that she
disbelieved in Tommy, but occasionally she was shaken with doubts as to
whether anyone so simple and honest as he was could ever be a match for
the fiendish subtlety of the arch criminal.
If they once reached Sir James Peel Edgerton in safety, all would be
well. But would they reach him? Would not the silent forces of Mr. Brown
already be assembling against them? Even that last picture of Tommy,
revolver in hand, failed to comfort her. By now he might be overpowered,
borne down by sheer force of numbers.... Tuppence mapped out her plan of
campaign.
As the train at length drew slowly into Charing Cross, Jane Finn sat up
with a start.
Have we arrived? I never thought we should!
Oh, I thought we d get to London all right. If there s going to be any
fun, now is when it will begin. Quick, get out. We ll nip into a taxi.
In another minute they were passing the barrier, had paid the necessary
fares, and were stepping into a taxi.
King s Cross, directed Tuppence. Then she gave a jump. A man looked in
at the window, just as they started. She was almost certain it was the
same man who had got into the carriage next to them. She had a horrible
feeling of being slowly hemmed in on every side.
You see, she explained to Jane, if they think we re going to Sir
James, this will put them off the scent. Now they ll imagine we re going
to Mr. Carter. His country place is north of London somewhere.
Crossing Holborn there was a block, and the taxi was held up. This was
what Tuppence had been waiting for.
Quick, she whispered. Open the right hand door!
The two girls stepped out into the traffic. Two minutes later they were
seated in another taxi and were retracing their steps, this time direct
to Carlton House Terrace.
There, said Tuppence, with great satisfaction, this ought to do them.
I can t help thinking that I m really rather clever! How that other taxi
man will swear! But I took his number, and I ll send him a postal order
to morrow, so that he won t lose by it if he happens to be genuine.
What s this thing swerving Oh!
There was a grinding noise and a bump. Another taxi had collided with
them.
In a flash Tuppence was out on the pavement. A policeman was
approaching. Before he arrived Tuppence had handed the driver five
shillings, and she and Jane had merged themselves in the crowd.
It s only a step or two now, said Tuppence breathlessly. The accident
had taken place in Trafalgar Square.
Do you think the collision was an accident, or done deliberately?
I don t know. It might have been either.
Hand in hand, the two girls hurried along.
It may be my fancy, said Tuppence suddenly, but I feel as though
there was some one behind us.
Hurry! murmured the other. Oh, hurry!
They were now at the corner of Carlton House Terrace, and their spirits
lightened. Suddenly a large and apparently intoxicated man barred their
way.
Good evening, ladies, he hiccupped. Whither away so fast?
Let us pass, please, said Tuppence imperiously.
Just a word with your pretty friend here. He stretched out an unsteady
hand, and clutched Jane by the shoulder. Tuppence heard other footsteps
behind. She did not pause to ascertain whether they were friends or
foes. Lowering her head, she repeated a man uvre of childish days,
and butted their aggressor full in the capacious middle. The success of
these unsportsmanlike tactics was immediate. The man sat down abruptly
on the pavement. Tuppence and Jane took to their heels. The house they
sought was some way down. Other footsteps echoed behind them. Their
breath was coming in choking gasps as they reached Sir James s door.
Tuppence seized the bell and Jane the knocker.
The man who had stopped them reached the foot of the steps. For a moment
he hesitated, and as he did so the door opened. They fell into the hall
together. Sir James came forward from the library door.
Hullo! What s this?
He stepped forward, and put his arm round Jane as she swayed
uncertainly. He half carried her into the library, and laid her on the
leather couch. From a tantalus on the table he poured out a few drops of
brandy, and forced her to drink them. With a sigh she sat up, her eyes
still wild and frightened.
It s all right. Don t be afraid, my child. You re quite safe.
Her breath came more normally, and the colour was returning to her
cheeks. Sir James looked at Tuppence quizzically.
So you re not dead, Miss Tuppence, any more than that Tommy boy of
yours was!
The Young Adventurers take a lot of killing, boasted Tuppence.
So it seems, said Sir James dryly. Am I right in thinking that the
joint venture has ended in success, and that this he turned to the
girl on the couch is Miss Jane Finn?
Jane sat up.
Yes, she said quietly, I am Jane Finn. I have a lot to tell you.
When you are stronger
No now! Her voice rose a little. I shall feel safer when I have told
everything.
As you please, said the lawyer.
He sat down in one of the big arm chairs facing the couch. In a low
voice Jane began her story.
I came over on the Lusitania to take up a post in Paris. I was
fearfully keen about the war, and just dying to help somehow or other. I
had been studying French, and my teacher said they were wanting help in
a hospital in Paris, so I wrote and offered my services, and they were
accepted. I hadn t got any folk of my own, so it made it easy to arrange
things.
When the Lusitania was torpedoed, a man came up to me. I d noticed
him more than once and I d figured it out in my own mind that he
was afraid of somebody or something. He asked me if I was a patriotic
American, and told me he was carrying papers which were just life or
death to the Allies. He asked me to take charge of them. I was to watch
for an advertisement in the Times . If it didn t appear, I was to take
them to the American Ambassador.
Most of what followed seems like a nightmare still. I see it in my
dreams sometimes.... I ll hurry over that part. Mr. Danvers had told me
to watch out. He might have been shadowed from New York, but he didn t
think so. At first I had no suspicions, but on the boat to Holyhead I
began to get uneasy. There was one woman who had been very keen to look
after me, and chum up with me generally a Mrs. Vandemeyer. At first I d
been only grateful to her for being so kind to me; but all the time I
felt there was something about her I didn t like, and on the Irish
boat I saw her talking to some queer looking men, and from the way they
looked I saw that they were talking about me. I remembered that she d
been quite near me on the Lusitania when Mr. Danvers gave me the
packet, and before that she d tried to talk to him once or twice. I
began to get scared, but I didn t quite see what to do.
I had a wild idea of stopping at Holyhead, and not going on to London
that day, but I soon saw that that would be plumb foolishness. The only
thing was to act as though I d noticed nothing, and hope for the best.
I couldn t see how they could get me if I was on my guard. One thing
I d done already as a precaution ripped open the oilskin packet and
substituted blank paper, and then sewn it up again. So, if anyone did
manage to rob me of it, it wouldn t matter.
What to do with the real thing worried me no end. Finally I opened it
out flat there were only two sheets and laid it between two of the
advertisement pages of a magazine. I stuck the two pages together
round the edge with some gum off an envelope. I carried the magazine
carelessly stuffed into the pocket of my ulster.
At Holyhead I tried to get into a carriage with people that looked all
right, but in a queer way there seemed always to be a crowd round me
shoving and pushing me just the way I didn t want to go. There was
something uncanny and frightening about it. In the end I found myself in
a carriage with Mrs. Vandemeyer after all. I went out into the corridor,
but all the other carriages were full, so I had to go back and sit down.
I consoled myself with the thought that there were other people in the
carriage there was quite a nice looking man and his wife sitting just
opposite. So I felt almost happy about it until just outside London. I
had leaned back and closed my eyes. I guess they thought I was asleep,
but my eyes weren t quite shut, and suddenly I saw the nice looking man
get something out of his bag and hand it to Mrs. Vandemeyer, and as he
did so he winked ....
I can t tell you how that wink sort of froze me through and through. My
only thought was to get out in the corridor as quick as ever I could. I
got up, trying to look natural and easy. Perhaps they saw something I
don t know but suddenly Mrs. Vandemeyer said Now, and flung something
over my nose and mouth as I tried to scream. At the same moment I felt a
terrific blow on the back of my head....
She shuddered. Sir James murmured something sympathetically. In a minute
she resumed:
I don t know how long it was before I came back to consciousness. I
felt very ill and sick. I was lying on a dirty bed. There was a
screen round it, but I could hear two people talking in the room. Mrs.
Vandemeyer was one of them. I tried to listen, but at first I couldn t
take much in. When at last I did begin to grasp what was going on I was
just terrified! I wonder I didn t scream right out there and then.
They hadn t found the papers. They d got the oilskin packet with the
blanks, and they were just mad! They didn t know whether I d changed
the papers, or whether Danvers had been carrying a dummy message,
while the real one was sent another way. They spoke of she closed her
eyes torturing me to find out!
I d never known what fear really sickening fear was before! Once
they came to look at me. I shut my eyes and pretended to be still
unconscious, but I was afraid they d hear the beating of my heart.
However, they went away again. I began thinking madly. What could I do?
I knew I wouldn t be able to stand up against torture very long.
Suddenly something put the thought of loss of memory into my head. The
subject had always interested me, and I d read an awful lot about it.
I had the whole thing at my finger tips. If only I could succeed in
carrying the bluff through, it might save me. I said a prayer, and drew
a long breath. Then I opened my eyes and started babbling in French!
Mrs. Vandemeyer came round the screen at once. Her face was so wicked I
nearly died, but I smiled up at her doubtfully, and asked her in French
where I was.
It puzzled her, I could see. She called the man she had been talking
to. He stood by the screen with his face in shadow. He spoke to me in
French. His voice was very ordinary and quiet, but somehow, I don t know
why, he scared me worse than the woman. I felt he d seen right through
me, but I went on playing my part. I asked again where I was, and
then went on that there was something I must remember must
remember only for the moment it was all gone. I worked myself up to
be more and more distressed. He asked me my name. I said I didn t
know that I couldn t remember anything at all.
Suddenly he caught my wrist, and began twisting it. The pain was awful.
I screamed. He went on. I screamed and screamed, but I managed to shriek
out things in French. I don t know how long I could have gone on, but
luckily I fainted. The last thing I heard was his voice saying: That s
not bluff! Anyway, a kid of her age wouldn t know enough. I guess he
forgot American girls are older for their age than English ones, and
take more interest in scientific subjects.
When I came to, Mrs. Vandemeyer was sweet as honey to me. She d had her
orders, I guess. She spoke to me in French told me I d had a shock
and been very ill. I should be better soon. I pretended to be rather
dazed murmured something about the doctor having hurt my wrist. She
looked relieved when I said that.
By and by she went out of the room altogether. I was suspicious still,
and lay quite quiet for some time. In the end, however, I got up and
walked round the room, examining it. I thought that even if anyone
was watching me from somewhere, it would seem natural enough under
the circumstances. It was a squalid, dirty place. There were no windows,
which seemed queer. I guessed the door would be locked, but I didn t
try it. There were some battered old pictures on the walls, representing
scenes from Faust .
Jane s two listeners gave a simultaneous Ah! The girl nodded.
Yes it was the place in Soho where Mr. Beresford was imprisoned. Of
course, at the time I didn t even know if I was in London. One thing was
worrying me dreadfully, but my heart gave a great throb of relief when
I saw my ulster lying carelessly over the back of a chair. And the
magazine was still rolled up in the pocket!
If only I could be certain that I was not being overlooked! I looked
carefully round the walls. There didn t seem to be a peep hole of any
kind nevertheless I felt kind of sure there must be. All of a sudden I
sat down on the edge of the table, and put my face in my hands, sobbing
out a Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! I ve got very sharp ears. I distinctly heard
the rustle of a dress, and slight creak. That was enough for me. I was
being watched!
I lay down on the bed again, and by and by Mrs. Vandemeyer brought me
some supper. She was still sweet as they make them. I guess she d been
told to win my confidence. Presently she produced the oilskin packet,
and asked me if I recognized it, watching me like a lynx all the time.
I took it and turned it over in a puzzled sort of way. Then I shook my
head. I said that I felt I ought to remember something about it, that
it was just as though it was all coming back, and then, before I could
get hold of it, it went again. Then she told me that I was her niece,
and that I was to call her Aunt Rita. I did obediently, and she told
me not to worry my memory would soon come back.
That was an awful night. I d made my plan whilst I was waiting for her.
The papers were safe so far, but I couldn t take the risk of leaving
them there any longer. They might throw that magazine away any minute.
I lay awake waiting until I judged it must be about two o clock in the
morning. Then I got up as softly as I could, and felt in the dark along
the left hand wall. Very gently, I unhooked one of the pictures from its
nail Marguerite with her casket of jewels. I crept over to my coat and
took out the magazine, and an odd envelope or two that I had shoved in.
Then I went to the washstand, and damped the brown paper at the back
of the picture all round. Presently I was able to pull it away. I had
already torn out the two stuck together pages from the magazine, and now
I slipped them with their precious enclosure between the picture and its
brown paper backing. A little gum from the envelopes helped me to
stick the latter up again. No one would dream the picture had ever been
tampered with. I rehung it on the wall, put the magazine back in my
coat pocket, and crept back to bed. I was pleased with my hiding place.
They d never think of pulling to pieces one of their own pictures. I
hoped that they d come to the conclusion that Danvers had been carrying
a dummy all along, and that, in the end, they d let me go.
As a matter of fact, I guess that s what they did think at first, and,
in a way, it was dangerous for me. I learnt afterwards that they nearly
did away with me then and there there was never much chance of their
letting me go but the first man, who was the boss, preferred to keep
me alive on the chance of my having hidden them, and being able to tell
where if I recovered my memory. They watched me constantly for weeks.
Sometimes they d ask me questions by the hour I guess there was nothing
they didn t know about the third degree! but somehow I managed to hold
my own. The strain of it was awful, though....
They took me back to Ireland, and over every step of the journey again,
in case I d hidden it somewhere en route . Mrs. Vandemeyer and another
woman never left me for a moment. They spoke of me as a young relative
of Mrs. Vandemeyer s whose mind was affected by the shock of the
Lusitania . There was no one I could appeal to for help without
giving myself away to them , and if I risked it and failed and Mrs.
Vandemeyer looked so rich, and so beautifully dressed, that I felt
convinced they d take her word against mine, and think it was part of my
mental trouble to think myself persecuted I felt that the horrors in
store for me would be too awful once they knew I d been only shamming.
Sir James nodded comprehendingly.
Mrs. Vandemeyer was a woman of great personality. With that and her
social position she would have had little difficulty in imposing her
point of view in preference to yours. Your sensational accusations
against her would not easily have found credence.
That s what I thought. It ended in my being sent to a sanatorium at
Bournemouth. I couldn t make up my mind at first whether it was a sham
affair or genuine. A hospital nurse had charge of me. I was a special
patient. She seemed so nice and normal that at last I determined to
confide in her. A merciful providence just saved me in time from falling
into the trap. My door happened to be ajar, and I heard her talking to
some one in the passage. She was one of them! They still fancied it
might be a bluff on my part, and she was put in charge of me to make
sure! After that, my nerve went completely. I dared trust nobody.
I think I almost hypnotized myself. After a while, I almost forgot
that I was really Jane Finn. I was so bent on playing the part of Janet
Vandemeyer that my nerves began to play me tricks. I became really
ill for months I sank into a sort of stupor. I felt sure I should
die soon, and that nothing really mattered. A sane person shut up in a
lunatic asylum often ends by becoming insane, they say. I guess I was
like that. Playing my part had become second nature to me. I wasn t even
unhappy in the end just apathetic. Nothing seemed to matter. And the
years went on.
And then suddenly things seemed to change. Mrs. Vandemeyer came down
from London. She and the doctor asked me questions, experimented with
various treatments. There was some talk of sending me to a specialist in
Paris. In the end, they did not dare risk it. I overheard something that
seemed to show that other people friends were looking for me. I
learnt later that the nurse who had looked after me went to Paris,
and consulted a specialist, representing herself to be me. He put her
through some searching tests, and exposed her loss of memory to be
fraudulent; but she had taken a note of his methods and reproduced
them on me. I dare say I couldn t have deceived the specialist for a
minute a man who has made a lifelong study of a thing is unique but
I managed once again to hold my own with them. The fact that I d not
thought of myself as Jane Finn for so long made it easier.
One night I was whisked off to London at a moment s notice. They took
me back to the house in Soho. Once I got away from the sanatorium I felt
different as though something in me that had been buried for a long
time was waking up again.
They sent me in to wait on Mr. Beresford. Of course I didn t know
his name then. I was suspicious I thought it was another trap. But he
looked so honest, I could hardly believe it. However, I was careful in
all I said, for I knew we could be overheard. There s a small hole, high
up in the wall.
But on the Sunday afternoon a message was brought to the house. They
were all very disturbed. Without their knowing, I listened. Word had
come that he was to be killed. I needn t tell the next part, because
you know it. I thought I d have time to rush up and get the papers from
their hiding place, but I was caught. So I screamed out that he was
escaping, and I said I wanted to go back to Marguerite. I shouted the
name three times very loud. I knew the others would think I meant
Mrs. Vandemeyer, but I hoped it might make Mr. Beresford think of the
picture. He d unhooked one the first day that s what made me hesitate
to trust him.
She paused.
Then the papers, said Sir James slowly, are still at the back of the
picture in that room.
Yes. The girl had sunk back on the sofa exhausted with the strain of
the long story.
Sir James rose to his feet. He looked at his watch.
Come, he said, we must go at once.
To night? queried Tuppence, surprised.
To morrow may be too late, said Sir James gravely. Besides, by
going to night we have the chance of capturing that great man and
super criminal Mr. Brown!
There was dead silence, and Sir James continued:
You have been followed here not a doubt of it. When we leave the house
we shall be followed again, but not molested, for it is Mr. Brown s
plan that we are to lead him . But the Soho house is under police
supervision night and day. There are several men watching it. When we
enter that house, Mr. Brown will not draw back he will risk all, on the
chance of obtaining the spark to fire his mine. And he fancies the risk
not great since he will enter in the guise of a friend!
Tuppence flushed, then opened her mouth impulsively.
But there s something you don t know that we haven t told you. Her
eyes dwelt on Jane in perplexity.
What is that? asked the other sharply. No hesitations, Miss Tuppence.
We need to be sure of our going.
But Tuppence, for once, seemed tongue tied.
It s so difficult you see, if I m wrong oh, it would be dreadful.
She made a grimace at the unconscious Jane. Never forgive me, she
observed cryptically.
You want me to help you out, eh?
Yes, please. You know who Mr. Brown is, don t you?
Yes, said Sir James gravely. At last I do.
At last? queried Tuppence doubtfully. Oh, but I thought She
paused.
You thought correctly, Miss Tuppence. I have been morally certain of
his identity for some time ever since the night of Mrs. Vandemeyer s
mysterious death.
Ah! breathed Tuppence.
For there we are up against the logic of facts. There are only two
solutions. Either the chloral was administered by her own hand, which
theory I reject utterly, or else
Yes?
Or else it was administered in the brandy you gave her. Only three
people touched that brandy you, Miss Tuppence, I myself, and one
other Mr. Julius Hersheimmer!
Jane Finn stirred and sat up, regarding the speaker with wide astonished
eyes.
At first, the thing seemed utterly impossible. Mr. Hersheimmer, as the
son of a prominent millionaire, was a well known figure in America. It
seemed utterly impossible that he and Mr. Brown could be one and the
same. But you cannot escape from the logic of facts. Since the thing
was so it must be accepted. Remember Mrs. Vandemeyer s sudden and
inexplicable agitation. Another proof, if proof was needed.
I took an early opportunity of giving you a hint. From some words of
Mr. Hersheimmer s at Manchester, I gathered that you had understood and
acted on that hint. Then I set to work to prove the impossible possible.
Mr. Beresford rang me up and told me, what I had already suspected,
that the photograph of Miss Jane Finn had never really been out of Mr.
Hersheimmer s possession
But the girl interrupted. Springing to her feet, she cried out angrily:
What do you mean? What are you trying to suggest? That Mr. Brown is
Julius? Julius my own cousin!
No, Miss Finn, said Sir James unexpectedly. Not your cousin. The man
who calls himself Julius Hersheimmer is no relation to you whatsoever.
CHAPTER XXVI. MR. BROWN
SIR James s words came like a bomb shell. Both girls looked equally
puzzled. The lawyer went across to his desk, and returned with a small
newspaper cutting, which he handed to Jane. Tuppence read it over
her shoulder. Mr. Carter would have recognized it. It referred to the
mysterious man found dead in New York.
As I was saying to Miss Tuppence, resumed the lawyer, I set to work
to prove the impossible possible. The great stumbling block was the
undeniable fact that Julius Hersheimmer was not an assumed name. When I
came across this paragraph my problem was solved. Julius Hersheimmer set
out to discover what had become of his cousin. He went out West, where
he obtained news of her and her photograph to aid him in his search. On
the eve of his departure from New York he was set upon and murdered. His
body was dressed in shabby clothes, and the face disfigured to prevent
identification. Mr. Brown took his place. He sailed immediately for
England. None of the real Hersheimmer s friends or intimates saw him
before he sailed though indeed it would hardly have mattered if they
had, the impersonation was so perfect. Since then he had been hand and
glove with those sworn to hunt him down. Every secret of theirs has been
known to him. Only once did he come near disaster. Mrs. Vandemeyer knew
his secret. It was no part of his plan that that huge bribe should ever
be offered to her. But for Miss Tuppence s fortunate change of plan, she
would have been far away from the flat when we arrived there. Exposure
stared him in the face. He took a desperate step, trusting in his
assumed character to avert suspicion. He nearly succeeded but not
quite.
I can t believe it, murmured Jane. He seemed so splendid.
The real Julius Hersheimmer was a splendid fellow! And Mr. Brown is
a consummate actor. But ask Miss Tuppence if she also has not had her
suspicions.
Jane turned mutely to Tuppence. The latter nodded.
I didn t want to say it, Jane I knew it would hurt you. And, after
all, I couldn t be sure. I still don t understand why, if he s Mr.
Brown, he rescued us.
Was it Julius Hersheimmer who helped you to escape?
Tuppence recounted to Sir James the exciting events of the evening,
ending up: But I can t see why!
Can t you? I can. So can young Beresford, by his actions. As a last
hope Jane Finn was to be allowed to escape and the escape must be
managed so that she harbours no suspicions of its being a put up job.
They re not averse to young Beresford s being in the neighbourhood, and,
if necessary, communicating with you. They ll take care to get him out
of the way at the right minute. Then Julius Hersheimmer dashes up and
rescues you in true melodramatic style. Bullets fly but don t hit
anybody. What would have happened next? You would have driven straight
to the house in Soho and secured the document which Miss Finn would
probably have entrusted to her cousin s keeping. Or, if he conducted the
search, he would have pretended to find the hiding place already rifled.
He would have had a dozen ways of dealing with the situation, but the
result would have been the same. And I rather fancy some accident would
have happened to both of you. You see, you know rather an inconvenient
amount. That s a rough outline. I admit I was caught napping; but
somebody else wasn t.
Tommy, said Tuppence softly.
Yes. Evidently when the right moment came to get rid of him he was too
sharp for them. All the same, I m not too easy in my mind about him.
Why?
Because Julius Hersheimmer is Mr. Brown, said Sir James dryly. And it
takes more than one man and a revolver to hold up Mr. Brown....
Tuppence paled a little.
What can we do?
Nothing until we ve been to the house in Soho. If Beresford has still
got the upper hand, there s nothing to fear. If otherwise, our enemy
will come to find us, and he will not find us unprepared! From a drawer
in the desk, he took a service revolver, and placed it in his coat
pocket.
Now we re ready. I know better than even to suggest going without you,
Miss Tuppence
I should think so indeed!
But I do suggest that Miss Finn should remain here. She will be
perfectly safe, and I am afraid she is absolutely worn out with all she
has been through.
But to Tuppence s surprise Jane shook her head.
No. I guess I m going too. Those papers were my trust. I must go
through with this business to the end. I m heaps better now anyway.
Sir James s car was ordered round. During the short drive Tuppence s
heart beat tumultuously. In spite of momentary qualms of uneasiness
respecting Tommy, she could not but feel exultation. They were going to
win!
The car drew up at the corner of the square and they got out. Sir James
went up to a plain clothes man who was on duty with several others, and
spoke to him. Then he rejoined the girls.
No one has gone into the house so far. It is being watched at the back
as well, so they are quite sure of that. Anyone who attempts to enter
after we have done so will be arrested immediately. Shall we go in?
A policeman produced a key. They all knew Sir James well. They had also
had orders respecting Tuppence. Only the third member of the party was
unknown to them. The three entered the house, pulling the door to behind
them. Slowly they mounted the rickety stairs. At the top was the ragged
curtain hiding the recess where Tommy had hidden that day. Tuppence had
heard the story from Jane in her character of Annette. She looked at
the tattered velvet with interest. Even now she could almost swear it
moved as though some one was behind it. So strong was the illusion
that she almost fancied she could make out the outline of a form....
Supposing Mr. Brown Julius was there waiting....
Impossible of course! Yet she almost went back to put the curtain aside
and make sure....
Now they were entering the prison room. No place for anyone to hide
here, thought Tuppence, with a sigh of relief, then chided herself
indignantly. She must not give way to this foolish fancying this
curious insistent feeling that Mr. Brown was in the house .... Hark!
what was that? A stealthy footstep on the stairs? There was some one
in the house! Absurd! She was becoming hysterical.
Jane had gone straight to the picture of Marguerite. She unhooked it
with a steady hand. The dust lay thick upon it, and festoons of cobwebs
lay between it and the wall. Sir James handed her a pocket knife, and
she ripped away the brown paper from the back.... The advertisement
page of a magazine fell out. Jane picked it up. Holding apart the frayed
inner edges she extracted two thin sheets covered with writing!
No dummy this time! The real thing!
We ve got it, said Tuppence. At last....
The moment was almost breathless in its emotion. Forgotten the faint
creakings, the imagined noises of a minute ago. None of them had eyes
for anything but what Jane held in her hand.
Sir James took it, and scrutinized it attentively.
Yes, he said quietly, this is the ill fated draft treaty!
We ve succeeded, said Tuppence. There was awe and an almost wondering
unbelief in her voice.
Sir James echoed her words as he folded the paper carefully and put it
away in his pocket book, then he looked curiously round the dingy room.
It was here that our young friend was confined for so long, was
it not? he said. A truly sinister room. You notice the absence of
windows, and the thickness of the close fitting door. Whatever took
place here would never be heard by the outside world.
Tuppence shivered. His words woke a vague alarm in her. What if there
was some one concealed in the house? Some one who might bar that door
on them, and leave them to die like rats in a trap? Then she realized
the absurdity of her thought. The house was surrounded by police who,
if they failed to reappear, would not hesitate to break in and make a
thorough search. She smiled at her own foolishness then looked up with
a start to find Sir James watching her. He gave her an emphatic little
nod.
Quite right, Miss Tuppence. You scent danger. So do I. So does Miss
Finn.
Yes, admitted Jane. It s absurd but I can t help it.
Sir James nodded again.
You feel as we all feel the presence of Mr. Bown . Yes as
Tuppence made a movement not a doubt of it Mr. Brown is here ....
In this house?
In this room.... You don t understand? I am Mr. Brown ....
Stupefied, unbelieving, they stared at him. The very lines of his face
had changed. It was a different man who stood before them. He smiled a
slow cruel smile.
Neither of you will leave this room alive! You said just now we had
succeeded. I have succeeded! The draft treaty is mine. His smile grew
wider as he looked at Tuppence. Shall I tell you how it will be? Sooner
or later the police will break in, and they will find three victims of
Mr. Brown three, not two, you understand, but fortunately the third
will not be dead, only wounded, and will be able to describe the attack
with a wealth of detail! The treaty? It is in the hands of Mr. Brown. So
no one will think of searching the pockets of Sir James Peel Edgerton!
He turned to Jane.
You outwitted me. I make my acknowledgments. But you will not do it
again.
There was a faint sound behind him, but, intoxicated with success, he
did not turn his head.
He slipped his hand into his pocket.
Checkmate to the Young Adventurers, he said, and slowly raised the big
automatic.
But, even as he did so, he felt himself seized from behind in a grip of
iron. The revolver was wrenched from his hand, and the voice of Julius
Hersheimmer said drawlingly:
I guess you re caught redhanded with the goods upon you.
The blood rushed to the K.C. s face, but his self control was
marvellous, as he looked from one to the other of his two captors. He
looked longest at Tommy.
You, he said beneath his breath. You! I might have known.
Seeing that he was disposed to offer no resistance, their grip
slackened. Quick as a flash his left hand, the hand which bore the big
signet ring, was raised to his lips....
Ave, C sar! te morituri salutant , he said, still looking at
Tommy.
Then his face changed, and with a long convulsive shudder he fell
forward in a crumpled heap, whilst an odour of bitter almonds filled the
air.
CHAPTER XXVII. A SUPPER PARTY AT THE SAVOY
THE supper party given by Mr. Julius Hersheimmer to a few friends on the
evening of the 30th will long be remembered in catering circles. It took
place in a private room, and Mr. Hersheimmer s orders were brief and
forcible. He gave carte blanche and when a millionaire gives carte
blanche he usually gets it!
Every delicacy out of season was duly provided. Waiters carried bottles
of ancient and royal vintage with loving care. The floral decorations
defied the seasons, and fruits of the earth as far apart as May and
November found themselves miraculously side by side. The list of guests
was small and select. The American Ambassador, Mr. Carter, who had taken
the liberty, he said, of bringing an old friend, Sir William Beresford,
with him, Archdeacon Cowley, Dr. Hall, those two youthful adventurers,
Miss Prudence Cowley and Mr. Thomas Beresford, and last, but not least,
as guest of honour, Miss Jane Finn.
Julius had spared no pains to make Jane s appearance a success. A
mysterious knock had brought Tuppence to the door of the apartment she
was sharing with the American girl. It was Julius. In his hand he held a
cheque.
Say, Tuppence, he began, will you do me a good turn? Take this, and
get Jane regularly togged up for this evening. You re all coming to
supper with me at the Savoy . See? Spare no expense. You get me?
Sure thing, mimicked Tuppence. We shall enjoy ourselves. It will be a
pleasure dressing Jane. She s the loveliest thing I ve ever seen.
That s so, agreed Mr. Hersheimmer fervently.
His fervour brought a momentary twinkle to Tuppence s eye.
By the way, Julius, she remarked demurely, I haven t given you my
answer yet.
Answer? said Julius. His face paled.
You know when you asked me to marry you, faltered Tuppence, her
eyes downcast in the true manner of the early Victorian heroine, and
wouldn t take no for an answer. I ve thought it well over
Yes? said Julius. The perspiration stood on his forehead.
Tuppence relented suddenly.
You great idiot! she said. What on earth induced you to do it? I
could see at the time you didn t care a twopenny dip for me!
Not at all. I had and still have the highest sentiments of esteem and
respect and admiration for you
H m! said Tuppence. Those are the kind of sentiments that very soon
go to the wall when the other sentiment comes along! Don t they, old
thing?
I don t know what you mean, said Julius stiffly, but a large and
burning blush overspread his countenance.
Shucks! retorted Tuppence. She laughed, and closed the door, reopening
it to add with dignity: Morally, I shall always consider I have been
jilted!
What was it? asked Jane as Tuppence rejoined her.
Julius.
What did he want?
Really, I think, he wanted to see you, but I wasn t going to let him.
Not until to night, when you re going to burst upon every one like King
Solomon in his glory! Come on! We re going to shop!
To most people the 29th, the much heralded Labour Day, had passed much
as any other day. Speeches were made in the Park and Trafalgar Square.
Straggling processions, singing the Red Flag , wandered through the
streets in a more or less aimless manner. Newspapers which had hinted at
a general strike, and the inauguration of a reign of terror, were forced
to hide their diminished heads. The bolder and more astute among
them sought to prove that peace had been effected by following their
counsels. In the Sunday papers a brief notice of the sudden death of Sir
James Peel Edgerton, the famous K.C., had appeared. Monday s paper
dealt appreciatively with the dead man s career. The exact manner of his
sudden death was never made public.
Tommy had been right in his forecast of the situation. It had been a
one man show. Deprived of their chief, the organization fell to pieces.
Kramenin had made a precipitate return to Russia, leaving England early
on Sunday morning. The gang had fled from Astley Priors in a panic,
leaving behind, in their haste, various damaging documents which
compromised them hopelessly. With these proofs of conspiracy in their
hands, aided further by a small brown diary taken from the pocket of the
dead man which had contained a full and damning r sum of the whole
plot, the Government had called an eleventh hour conference. The Labour
leaders were forced to recognize that they had been used as a cat s
paw. Certain concessions were made by the Government, and were eagerly
accepted. It was to be Peace, not War!
But the Cabinet knew by how narrow a margin they had escaped utter
disaster. And burnt in on Mr. Carter s brain was the strange scene which
had taken place in the house in Soho the night before.
He had entered the squalid room to find that great man, the friend of
a lifetime, dead betrayed out of his own mouth. From the dead man s
pocket book he had retrieved the ill omened draft treaty, and then
and there, in the presence of the other three, it had been reduced to
ashes.... England was saved!
And now, on the evening of the 30th, in a private room at the Savoy ,
Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer was receiving his guests.
Mr. Carter was the first to arrive. With him was a choleric looking old
gentleman, at sight of whom Tommy flushed up to the roots of his hair.
He came forward.
Ha! said the old gentleman, surveying him apoplectically. So you re
my nephew, are you? Not much to look at but you ve done good work, it
seems. Your mother must have brought you up well after all. Shall we
let bygones be bygones, eh? You re my heir, you know; and in future I
propose to make you an allowance and you can look upon Chalmers Park as
your home.
Thank you, sir, it s awfully decent of you.
Where s this young lady I ve been hearing such a lot about?
Tommy introduced Tuppence.
Ha! said Sir William, eyeing her. Girls aren t what they used to be
in my young days.
Yes, they are, said Tuppence. Their clothes are different, perhaps,
but they themselves are just the same.
Well, perhaps you re right. Minxes then minxes now!
That s it, said Tuppence. I m a frightful minx myself.
I believe you, said the old gentleman, chuckling, and pinched her ear
in high good humour. Most young women were terrified of the old bear,
as they termed him. Tuppence s pertness delighted the old misogynist.
Then came the timid archdeacon, a little bewildered by the company in
which he found himself, glad that his daughter was considered to have
distinguished herself, but unable to help glancing at her from time
to time with nervous apprehension. But Tuppence behaved admirably. She
forbore to cross her legs, set a guard upon her tongue, and steadfastly
refused to smoke.
Dr. Hall came next, and he was followed by the American Ambassador.
We might as well sit down, said Julius, when he had introduced all his
guests to each other. Tuppence, will you
He indicated the place of honour with a wave of his hand.
But Tuppence shook her head.
No that s Jane s place! When one thinks of how she s held out all
these years, she ought to be made the queen of the feast to night.
Julius flung her a grateful glance, and Jane came forward shyly to the
allotted seat. Beautiful as she had seemed before, it was as nothing to
the loveliness that now went fully adorned. Tuppence had performed her
part faithfully. The model gown supplied by a famous dressmaker had been
entitled A tiger lily. It was all golds and reds and browns, and out
of it rose the pure column of the girl s white throat, and the bronze
masses of hair that crowned her lovely head. There was admiration in
every eye, as she took her seat.
Soon the supper party was in full swing, and with one accord Tommy was
called upon for a full and complete explanation.
You ve been too darned close about the whole business, Julius accused
him. You let on to me that you were off to the Argentine though I
guess you had your reasons for that. The idea of both you and Tuppence
casting me for the part of Mr. Brown just tickles me to death!
The idea was not original to them, said Mr. Carter gravely. It was
suggested, and the poison very carefully instilled, by a past master in
the art. The paragraph in the New York paper suggested the plan to him,
and by means of it he wove a web that nearly enmeshed you fatally.
I never liked him, said Julius. I felt from the first that there was
something wrong about him, and I always suspected that it was he who
silenced Mrs. Vandemeyer so appositely. But it wasn t till I heard that
the order for Tommy s execution came right on the heels of our interview
with him that Sunday that I began to tumble to the fact that he was the
big bug himself.
I never suspected it at all, lamented Tuppence. I ve always thought
I was so much cleverer than Tommy but he s undoubtedly scored over me
handsomely.
Julius agreed.
Tommy s been the goods this trip! And, instead of sitting there as dumb
as a fish, let him banish his blushes, and tell us all about it.
Hear! hear!
There s nothing to tell, said Tommy, acutely uncomfortable. I was an
awful mug right up to the time I found that photograph of Annette, and
realized that she was Jane Finn. Then I remembered how persistently she
had shouted out that word Marguerite and I thought of the pictures,
and well, that s that. Then of course I went over the whole thing to
see where I d made an ass of myself.
Go on, said Mr. Carter, as Tommy showed signs of taking refuge in
silence once more.
That business about Mrs. Vandemeyer had worried me when Julius told me
about it. On the face of it, it seemed that he or Sir James must have
done the trick. But I didn t know which. Finding that photograph in the
drawer, after that story of how it had been got from him by Inspector
Brown, made me suspect Julius. Then I remembered that it was Sir James
who had discovered the false Jane Finn. In the end, I couldn t make up
my mind and just decided to take no chances either way. I left a note
for Julius, in case he was Mr. Brown, saying I was off to the Argentine,
and I dropped Sir James s letter with the offer of the job by the desk
so that he would see it was a genuine stunt. Then I wrote my letter to
Mr. Carter and rang up Sir James. Taking him into my confidence would
be the best thing either way, so I told him everything except where I
believed the papers to be hidden. The way he helped me to get on the
track of Tuppence and Annette almost disarmed me, but not quite. I kept
my mind open between the two of them. And then I got a bogus note from
Tuppence and I knew!
But how?
Tommy took the note in question from his pocket and passed it round the
table.
It s her handwriting all right, but I knew it wasn t from her because
of the signature. She d never spell her name Twopence, but anyone
who d never seen it written might quite easily do so. Julius had seen
it he showed me a note of hers to him once but Sir James hadn t!
After that everything was plain sailing. I sent off Albert post haste to
Mr. Carter. I pretended to go away, but doubled back again. When Julius
came bursting up in his car, I felt it wasn t part of Mr. Brown s
plan and that there would probably be trouble. Unless Sir James was
actually caught in the act, so to speak, I knew Mr. Carter would never
believe it of him on my bare word
I didn t, interposed Mr. Carter ruefully.
That s why I sent the girls off to Sir James. I was sure they d fetch
up at the house in Soho sooner or later. I threatened Julius with the
revolver, because I wanted Tuppence to repeat that to Sir James, so that
he wouldn t worry about us. The moment the girls were out of sight I
told Julius to drive like hell for London, and as we went along I told
him the whole story. We got to the Soho house in plenty of time and met
Mr. Carter outside. After arranging things with him we went in and hid
behind the curtain in the recess. The policemen had orders to say, if
they were asked, that no one had gone into the house. That s all.
And Tommy came to an abrupt halt.
There was silence for a moment.
By the way, said Julius suddenly, you re all wrong about that
photograph of Jane. It was taken from me, but I found it again.
Where? cried Tuppence.
In that little safe on the wall in Mrs. Vandemeyer s bedroom.
I knew you found something, said Tuppence reproachfully. To tell you
the truth, that s what started me off suspecting you. Why didn t you
say?
I guess I was a mite suspicious too. It had been got away from me once,
and I determined I wouldn t let on I d got it until a photographer had
made a dozen copies of it!
We all kept back something or other, said Tuppence thoughtfully. I
suppose secret service work makes you like that!
In the pause that ensued, Mr. Carter took from his pocket a small shabby
brown book.
Beresford has just said that I would not have believed Sir James Peel
Edgerton to be guilty unless, so to speak, he was caught in the act.
That is so. Indeed, not until I read the entries in this little book
could I bring myself fully to credit the amazing truth. This book will
pass into the possession of Scotland Yard, but it will never be publicly
exhibited. Sir James s long association with the law would make it
undesirable. But to you, who know the truth, I propose to read certain
passages which will throw some light on the extraordinary mentality of
this great man.
He opened the book, and turned the thin pages.
... It is madness to keep this book. I know that. It is documentary
evidence against me. But I have never shrunk from taking risks. And I
feel an urgent need for self expression.... The book will only be taken
from my dead body....
... From an early age I realized that I had exceptional abilities. Only
a fool underestimates his capabilities. My brain power was greatly above
the average. I know that I was born to succeed. My appearance was
the only thing against me. I was quiet and insignificant utterly
nondescript....
... When I was a boy I heard a famous murder trial. I was deeply
impressed by the power and eloquence of the counsel for the defence.
For the first time I entertained the idea of taking my talents to that
particular market.... Then I studied the criminal in the dock.... The
man was a fool he had been incredibly, unbelievably stupid. Even
the eloquence of his counsel was hardly likely to save him. I felt
an immeasurable contempt for him.... Then it occurred to me that the
criminal standard was a low one. It was the wastrels, the failures, the
general riff raff of civilization who drifted into crime....
Strange that men of brains had never realized its extraordinary
opportunities.... I played with the idea.... What a magnificent
field what unlimited possibilities! It made my brain reel....
... I read standard works on crime and criminals. They all confirmed my
opinion. Degeneracy, disease never the deliberate embracing of a career
by a far seeing man. Then I considered. Supposing my utmost ambitions
were realized that I was called to the bar, and rose to the height of
my profession? That I entered politics say, even, that I became Prime
Minister of England? What then? Was that power? Hampered at every turn
by my colleagues, fettered by the democratic system of which I should
be the mere figurehead! No the power I dreamed of was absolute! An
autocrat! A dictator! And such power could only be obtained by working
outside the law. To play on the weaknesses of human nature, then on the
weaknesses of nations to get together and control a vast organization,
and finally to overthrow the existing order, and rule! The thought
intoxicated me....
... I saw that I must lead two lives. A man like myself is bound to
attract notice. I must have a successful career which would mask my true
activities.... Also I must cultivate a personality. I modelled myself
upon famous K.C. s. I reproduced their mannerisms, their magnetism. If I
had chosen to be an actor, I should have been the greatest actor living!
No disguises no grease paint no false beards! Personality! I put it
on like a glove! When I shed it, I was myself, quiet, unobtrusive, a man
like every other man. I called myself Mr. Brown. There are hundreds of
men called Brown there are hundreds of men looking just like me....
... I succeeded in my false career. I was bound to succeed. I shall
succeed in the other. A man like me cannot fail....
... I have been reading a life of Napoleon. He and I have much in
common....
... I make a practice of defending criminals. A man should look after
his own people....
... Once or twice I have felt afraid. The first time was in Italy.
There was a dinner given. Professor D , the great alienist, was
present. The talk fell on insanity. He said, A great many men are
mad, and no one knows it. They do not know it themselves. I do not
understand why he looked at me when he said that. His glance was
strange.... I did not like it....
... The war has disturbed me.... I thought it would further my plans.
The Germans are so efficient. Their spy system, too, was excellent.
The streets are full of these boys in khaki. All empty headed young
fools.... Yet I do not know.... They won the war.... It disturbs me....
... My plans are going well.... A girl butted in I do not think she
really knew anything.... But we must give up the Esthonia.... No risks
now....
.... All goes well. The loss of memory is vexing. It cannot be a fake.
No girl could deceive ME!...
...The 29th.... That is very soon.... Mr. Carter paused.
I will not read the details of the coup that was planned. But there
are just two small entries that refer to the three of you. In the light
of what happened they are interesting.
... By inducing the girl to come to me of her own accord, I have
succeeded in disarming her. But she has intuitive flashes that might be
dangerous.... She must be got out of the way.... I can do nothing with
the American. He suspects and dislikes me. But he cannot know. I fancy
my armour is impregnable.... Sometimes I fear I have underestimated
the other boy. He is not clever, but it is hard to blind his eyes to
facts....
Mr. Carter shut the book.
A great man, he said. Genius, or insanity, who can say?
There was silence.
Then Mr. Carter rose to his feet.
I will give you a toast. The Joint Venture which has so amply justified
itself by success!
It was drunk with acclamation.
There s something more we want to hear, continued Mr. Carter. He
looked at the American Ambassador. I speak for you also, I know. We ll
ask Miss Jane Finn to tell us the story that only Miss Tuppence has
heard so far but before we do so we ll drink her health. The health of
one of the bravest of America s daughters, to whom is due the thanks and
gratitude of two great countries!
CHAPTER XXVIII. AND AFTER
THAT was a mighty good toast, Jane, said Mr. Hersheimmer, as he and
his cousin were being driven back in the Rolls Royce to the Ritz .
The one to the joint venture?
No the one to you. There isn t another girl in the world who could
have carried it through as you did. You were just wonderful!
Jane shook her head.
I don t feel wonderful. At heart I m just tired and lonesome and
longing for my own country.
That brings me to something I wanted to say. I heard the Ambassador
telling you his wife hoped you would come to them at the Embassy right
away. That s good enough, but I ve got another plan. Jane I want you to
marry me! Don t get scared and say no at once. You can t love me right
away, of course, that s impossible. But I ve loved you from the very
moment I set eyes on your photo and now I ve seen you I m simply crazy
about you! If you ll only marry me, I won t worry you any you shall
take your own time. Maybe you ll never come to love me, and if that s
the case I ll manage to set you free. But I want the right to look after
you, and take care of you.
That s what I want, said the girl wistfully. Some one who ll be good
to me. Oh, you don t know how lonesome I feel!
Sure thing I do. Then I guess that s all fixed up, and I ll see the
archbishop about a special license to morrow morning.
Oh, Julius!
Well, I don t want to hustle you any, Jane, but there s no sense in
waiting about. Don t be scared I shan t expect you to love me all at
once.
But a small hand was slipped into his.
I love you now, Julius, said Jane Finn. I loved you that first moment
in the car when the bullet grazed your cheek....
Five minutes later Jane murmured softly:
I don t know London very well, Julius, but is it such a very long way
from the Savoy to the Ritz?
It depends how you go, explained Julius unblushingly. We re going by
way of Regent s Park!
Oh, Julius what will the chauffeur think?
At the wages I pay him, he knows better than to do any independent
thinking. Why, Jane, the only reason I had the supper at the Savoy was
so that I could drive you home. I didn t see how I was ever going to
get hold of you alone. You and Tuppence have been sticking together
like Siamese twins. I guess another day of it would have driven me and
Beresford stark staring mad!
Oh. Is he ?
Of course he is. Head over ears.
I thought so, said Jane thoughtfully.
Why?
From all the things Tuppence didn t say!
There you have me beat, said Mr. Hersheimmer. But Jane only laughed.
In the meantime, the Young Adventurers were sitting bolt upright,
very stiff and ill at ease, in a taxi which, with a singular lack of
originality, was also returning to the Ritz via Regent s Park.
A terrible constraint seemed to have settled down between them. Without
quite knowing what had happened, everything seemed changed. They were
tongue tied paralysed. All the old camaraderie was gone.
Tuppence could think of nothing to say.
Tommy was equally afflicted.
They sat very straight and forbore to look at each other.
At last Tuppence made a desperate effort.
Rather fun, wasn t it?
Rather.
Another silence.
I like Julius, essayed Tuppence again.
Tommy was suddenly galvanized into life.
You re not going to marry him, do you hear? he said dictatorially. I
forbid it.
Oh! said Tuppence meekly.
Absolutely, you understand.
He doesn t want to marry me he really only asked me out of kindness.
That s not very likely, scoffed Tommy.
It s quite true. He s head over ears in love with Jane. I expect he s
proposing to her now.
She ll do for him very nicely, said Tommy condescendingly.
Don t you think she s the most lovely creature you ve ever seen?
Oh, I dare say.
But I suppose you prefer sterling worth, said Tuppence demurely.
I oh, dash it all, Tuppence, you know!
I like your uncle, Tommy, said Tuppence, hastily creating a diversion.
By the way, what are you going to do, accept Mr. Carter s offer of
a Government job, or accept Julius s invitation and take a richly
remunerated post in America on his ranch?
I shall stick to the old ship, I think, though it s awfully good of
Hersheimmer. But I feel you d be more at home in London.
I don t see where I come in.
I do, said Tommy positively.
Tuppence stole a glance at him sideways.
There s the money, too, she observed thoughtfully.
What money?
We re going to get a cheque each. Mr. Carter told me so.
Did you ask how much? inquired Tommy sarcastically.
Yes, said Tuppence triumphantly. But I shan t tell you.
Tuppence, you are the limit!
It has been fun, hasn t it, Tommy? I do hope we shall have lots more
adventures.
You re insatiable, Tuppence. I ve had quite enough adventures for the
present.
Well, shopping is almost as good, said Tuppence dreamily. Think of
buying old furniture, and bright carpets, and futurist silk curtains,
and a polished dining table, and a divan with lots of cushions.
Hold hard, said Tommy. What s all this for?
Possibly a house but I think a flat.
Whose flat?
You think I mind saying it, but I don t in the least! Ours , so
there!
You darling! cried Tommy, his arms tightly round her. I was
determined to make you say it. I owe you something for the relentless
way you ve squashed me whenever I ve tried to be sentimental.
Tuppence raised her face to his. The taxi proceeded on its course round
the north side of Regent s Park.
You haven t really proposed now, pointed out Tuppence. Not what our
grandmothers would call a proposal. But after listening to a rotten one
like Julius s, I m inclined to let you off.
You won t be able to get out of marrying me, so don t you think it.
What fun it will be, responded Tuppence. Marriage is called all sorts
of things, a haven, and a refuge, and a crowning glory, and a state of
bondage, and lots more. But do you know what I think it is?
What?
A sport!
And a damned good sport too, said Tommy.
voice to a whisper.
Look after her, Mr. Hastings. My poor Emily. They re a lot of
sharks all of them. Oh, I know what I m talking about. There isn t one
of them that s not hard up and trying to get money out of her. I ve
protected her as much as I could. Now I m out of the way, they ll
impose upon her.
Of course, Miss Howard, I said, I ll do everything I can, but I m
sure you re excited and overwrought.
She interrupted me by slowly shaking her forefinger.
Young man, trust me. I ve lived in the world rather longer than you
have. All I ask you is to keep your eyes open. You ll see what I mean.
The throb of the motor came through the open window, and Miss Howard
rose and moved to the door. John s voice sounded outside. With her hand
on the handle, she turned her head over her shoulder, and beckoned to
me.
Above all, Mr. Hastings, watch that devil her husband!
There was no time for more. Miss Howard was swallowed up in an eager
chorus of protests and good byes. The Inglethorps did not appear.
As the motor drove away, Mrs. Cavendish suddenly detached herself from
the group, and moved across the drive to the lawn to meet a tall
bearded man who had been evidently making for the house. The colour
rose in her cheeks as she held out her hand to him.
Who is that? I asked sharply, for instinctively I distrusted the man.
That s Dr. Bauerstein, said John shortly.
And who is Dr. Bauerstein?
He s staying in the village doing a rest cure, after a bad nervous
breakdown. He s a London specialist; a very clever man one of the
greatest living experts on poisons, I believe.
And he s a great friend of Mary s, put in Cynthia, the irrepressible.
John Cavendish frowned and changed the subject.
Come for a stroll, Hastings. This has been a most rotten business. She
always had a rough tongue, but there is no stauncher friend in England
than Evelyn Howard.
He took the path through the plantation, and we walked down to the
village through the woods which bordered one side of the estate.
As we passed through one of the gates on our way home again, a pretty
young woman of gipsy type coming in the opposite direction bowed and
smiled.
That s a pretty girl, I remarked appreciatively.
John s face hardened.
That is Mrs. Raikes.
The one that Miss Howard
Exactly, said John, with rather unnecessary abruptness.
I thought of the white haired old lady in the big house, and that vivid
wicked little face that had just smiled into ours, and a vague chill of
foreboding crept over me. I brushed it aside.
Styles is really a glorious old place, I said to John.
He nodded rather gloomily.
Yes, it s a fine property. It ll be mine some day should be mine now
by rights, if my father had only made a decent will. And then I
shouldn t be so damned hard up as I am now.
Hard up, are you?
My dear Hastings, I don t mind telling you that I m at my wits end
for money.
Couldn t your brother help you?
Lawrence? He s gone through every penny he ever had, publishing rotten
verses in fancy bindings. No, we re an impecunious lot. My mother s
always been awfully good to us, I must say. That is, up to now. Since
her marriage, of course he broke off, frowning.
For the first time I felt that, with Evelyn Howard, something
indefinable had gone from the atmosphere. Her presence had spelt
security. Now that security was removed and the air seemed rife with
suspicion. The sinister face of Dr. Bauerstein recurred to me
unpleasantly. A vague suspicion of everyone and everything filled my
mind. Just for a moment I had a premonition of approaching evil.
CHAPTER II. THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY
I had arrived at Styles on the 5th of July. I come now to the events of
the 16th and 17th of that month. For the convenience of the reader I
will recapitulate the incidents of those days in as exact a manner as
possible. They were elicited subsequently at the trial by a process of
long and tedious cross examinations.
I received a letter from Evelyn Howard a couple of days after her
departure, telling me she was working as a nurse at the big hospital in
Middlingham, a manufacturing town some fifteen miles away, and begging
me to let her know if Mrs. Inglethorp should show any wish to be
reconciled.
The only fly in the ointment of my peaceful days was Mrs. Cavendish s
extraordinary, and, for my part, unaccountable preference for the
society of Dr. Bauerstein. What she saw in the man I cannot imagine,
but she was always asking him up to the house, and often went off for
long expeditions with him. I must confess that I was quite unable to
see his attraction.
The 16th of July fell on a Monday. It was a day of turmoil. The famous
bazaar had taken place on Saturday, and an entertainment, in connection
with the same charity, at which Mrs. Inglethorp was to recite a War
poem, was to be held that night. We were all busy during the morning
arranging and decorating the Hall in the village where it was to take
place. We had a late luncheon and spent the afternoon resting in the
garden. I noticed that John s manner was somewhat unusual. He seemed
very excited and restless.
After tea, Mrs. Inglethorp went to lie down to rest before her efforts
in the evening and I challenged Mary Cavendish to a single at tennis.
About a quarter to seven, Mrs. Inglethorp called us that we should be
late as supper was early that night. We had rather a scramble to get
ready in time; and before the meal was over the motor was waiting at
the door.
The entertainment was a great success, Mrs. Inglethorp s recitation
receiving tremendous applause. There were also some tableaux in which
Cynthia took part. She did not return with us, having been asked to a
supper party, and to remain the night with some friends who had been
acting with her in the tableaux.
The following morning, Mrs. Inglethorp stayed in bed to breakfast, as
she was rather overtired; but she appeared in her briskest mood about
12.30, and swept Lawrence and myself off to a luncheon party.
Such a charming invitation from Mrs. Rolleston. Lady Tadminster s
sister, you know. The Rollestons came over with the Conqueror one of
our oldest families.
Mary had excused herself on the plea of an engagement with Dr.
Bauerstein.
We had a pleasant luncheon, and as we drove away Lawrence suggested
that we should return by Tadminster, which was barely a mile out of our
way, and pay a visit to Cynthia in her dispensary. Mrs. Inglethorp
replied that this was an excellent idea, but as she had several letters
to write she would drop us there, and we could come back with Cynthia
in the pony trap.
We were detained under suspicion by the hospital porter, until Cynthia
appeared to vouch for us, looking very cool and sweet in her long white
overall. She took us up to her sanctum, and introduced us to her fellow
dispenser, a rather awe inspiring individual, whom Cynthia cheerily
addressed as Nibs.
What a lot of bottles! I exclaimed, as my eye travelled round the
small room. Do you really know what s in them all?
Say something original, groaned Cynthia. Every single person who
comes up here says that. We are really thinking of bestowing a prize on
the first individual who does not say: What a lot of bottles! And I
know the next thing you re going to say is: How many people have you
poisoned?
I pleaded guilty with a laugh.
If you people only knew how fatally easy it is to poison someone by
mistake, you wouldn t joke about it. Come on, let s have tea. We ve got
all sorts of secret stories in that cupboard. No, Lawrence that s the
poison cupboard. The big cupboard that s right.
We had a very cheery tea, and assisted Cynthia to wash up afterwards.
We had just put away the last tea spoon when a knock came at the door.
The countenances of Cynthia and Nibs were suddenly petrified into a
stern and forbidding expression.
Come in, said Cynthia, in a sharp professional tone.
A young and rather scared looking nurse appeared with a bottle which
she proffered to Nibs, who waved her towards Cynthia with the somewhat
enigmatical remark:
I m not really here to day.
Cynthia took the bottle and examined it with the severity of a judge.
This should have been sent up this morning.
Sister is very sorry. She forgot.
Sister should read the rules outside the door.
I gathered from the little nurse s expression that there was not the
least likelihood of her having the hardihood to retail this message to
the dreaded Sister .
So now it can t be done until to morrow, finished Cynthia.
Don t you think you could possibly let us have it to night?
Well, said Cynthia graciously, we are very busy, but if we have time
it shall be done.
The little nurse withdrew, and Cynthia promptly took a jar from the
shelf, refilled the bottle, and placed it on the table outside the
door.
I laughed.
Discipline must be maintained?
Exactly. Come out on our little balcony. You can see all the outside
wards there.
I followed Cynthia and her friend and they pointed out the different
wards to me. Lawrence remained behind, but after a few moments Cynthia
called to him over her shoulder to come and join us. Then she looked at
her watch.
Nothing more to do, Nibs?
No.
All right. Then we can lock up and go.
I had seen Lawrence in quite a different light that afternoon. Compared
to John, he was an astoundingly difficult person to get to know. He was
the opposite of his brother in almost every respect, being unusually
shy and reserved. Yet he had a certain charm of manner, and I fancied
that, if one really knew him well, one could have a deep affection for
him. I had always fancied that his manner to Cynthia was rather
constrained, and that she on her side was inclined to be shy of him.
But they were both gay enough this afternoon, and chatted together like
a couple of children.
As we drove through the village, I remembered that I wanted some
stamps, so accordingly we pulled up at the post office.
As I came out again, I cannoned into a little man who was just
entering. I drew aside and apologised, when suddenly, with a loud
exclamation, he clasped me in his arms and kissed me warmly.
Mon ami Hastings! he cried. It is indeed mon ami Hastings!
Poirot! I exclaimed.
I turned to the pony trap.
This is a very pleasant meeting for me, Miss Cynthia. This is my old
friend, Monsieur Poirot, whom I have not seen for years.
Oh, we know Monsieur Poirot, said Cynthia gaily. But I had no idea
he was a friend of yours.
Yes, indeed, said Poirot seriously. I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. It
is by the charity of that good Mrs. Inglethorp that I am here. Then,
as I looked at him inquiringly: Yes, my friend, she had kindly
extended hospitality to seven of my countrypeople who, alas, are
refugees from their native land. We Belgians will always remember her
with gratitude.
Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than
five feet, four inches, but carried himself with great dignity. His
head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little
on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness of
his attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would have
caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified
little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his
time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As a
detective, his flair had been extraordinary, and he had achieved
triumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.
He pointed out to me the little house inhabited by him and his fellow
Belgians, and I promised to go and see him at an early date. Then he
raised his hat with a flourish to Cynthia, and we drove away.
He s a dear little man, said Cynthia. I d no idea you knew him.
You ve been entertaining a celebrity unawares, I replied.
And, for the rest of the way home, I recited to them the various
exploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.
We arrived back in a very cheerful mood. As we entered the hall, Mrs.
Inglethorp came out of her boudoir. She looked flushed and upset.
Oh, it s you, she said.
Is there anything the matter, Aunt Emily? asked Cynthia.
Certainly not, said Mrs. Inglethorp sharply. What should there be?
Then catching sight of Dorcas, the parlourmaid, going into the
dining room, she called to her to bring some stamps into the boudoir.
Yes, m m. The old servant hesitated, then added diffidently: Don t
you think, m m, you d better get to bed? You re looking very tired.
Perhaps you re right, Dorcas yes no not now. I ve some letters I must
finish by post time. Have you lighted the fire in my room as I told
you?
Yes, m m.
Then I ll go to bed directly after supper.
She went into the boudoir again, and Cynthia stared after her.
Goodness gracious! I wonder what s up? she said to Lawrence.
He did not seem to have heard her, for without a word he turned on his
heel and went out of the house.
I suggested a quick game of tennis before supper and, Cynthia agreeing,
I ran upstairs to fetch my racquet.
Mrs. Cavendish was coming down the stairs. It may have been my fancy,
but she, too, was looking odd and disturbed.
Had a good walk with Dr. Bauerstein? I asked, trying to appear as
indifferent as I could.
I didn t go, she replied abruptly. Where is Mrs. Inglethorp?
In the boudoir.
Her hand clenched itself on the banisters, then she seemed to nerve
herself for some encounter, and went rapidly past me down the stairs
across the hall to the boudoir, the door of which she shut behind her.
As I ran out to the tennis court a few moments later, I had to pass the
open boudoir window, and was unable to help overhearing the following
scrap of dialogue. Mary Cavendish was saying in the voice of a woman
desperately controlling herself:
Then you won t show it to me?
To which Mrs. Inglethorp replied:
My dear Mary, it has nothing to do with that matter.
Then show it to me.
I tell you it is not what you imagine. It does not concern you in the
least.
To which Mary Cavendish replied, with a rising bitterness:
Of course, I might have known you would shield him.
Cynthia was waiting for me, and greeted me eagerly with:
I say! There s been the most awful row! I ve got it all out of
Dorcas.
What kind of a row?
Between Aunt Emily and him . I do hope she s found him out at last!
Was Dorcas there, then?
Of course not. She happened to be near the door . It was a real old
bust up. I do wish I knew what it was all about.
I thought of Mrs. Raikes s gipsy face, and Evelyn Howard s warnings,
but wisely decided to hold my peace, whilst Cynthia exhausted every
possible hypothesis, and cheerfully hoped, Aunt Emily will send him
away, and will never speak to him again.
I was anxious to get hold of John, but he was nowhere to be seen.
Evidently something very momentous had occurred that afternoon. I tried
to forget the few words I had overheard; but, do what I would, I could
not dismiss them altogether from my mind. What was Mary Cavendish s
concern in the matter?
Mr. Inglethorp was in the drawing room when I came down to supper. His
face was impassive as ever, and the strange unreality of the man struck
me afresh.
Mrs. Inglethorp came down last. She still looked agitated, and during
the meal there was a somewhat constrained silence. Inglethorp was
unusually quiet. As a rule, he surrounded his wife with little
attentions, placing a cushion at her back, and altogether playing the
part of the devoted husband. Immediately after supper, Mrs. Inglethorp
retired to her boudoir again.
Send my coffee in here, Mary, she called. I ve just five minutes to
catch the post.
Cynthia and I went and sat by the open window in the drawing room. Mary
Cavendish brought our coffee to us. She seemed excited.
Do you young people want lights, or do you enjoy the twilight? she
asked. Will you take Mrs. Inglethorp her coffee, Cynthia? I will pour
it out.
Do not trouble, Mary, said Inglethorp. I will take it to Emily. He
poured it out, and went out of the room carrying it carefully.
Lawrence followed him, and Mrs. Cavendish sat down by us.
We three sat for some time in silence. It was a glorious night, hot and
still. Mrs. Cavendish fanned herself gently with a palm leaf.
It s almost too hot, she murmured. We shall have a thunderstorm.
Alas, that these harmonious moments can never endure! My paradise was
rudely shattered by the sound of a well known, and heartily disliked,
voice in the hall.
Dr. Bauerstein! exclaimed Cynthia. What a funny time to come.
I glanced jealously at Mary Cavendish, but she seemed quite
undisturbed, the delicate pallor of her cheeks did not vary.
In a few moments, Alfred Inglethorp had ushered the doctor in, the
latter laughing, and protesting that he was in no fit state for a
drawing room. In truth, he presented a sorry spectacle, being literally
plastered with mud.
What have you been doing, doctor? cried Mrs. Cavendish.
I must make my apologies, said the doctor. I did not really mean to
come in, but Mr. Inglethorp insisted.
Well, Bauerstein, you are in a plight, said John, strolling in from
the hall. Have some coffee, and tell us what you have been up to.
Thank you, I will. He laughed rather ruefully, as he described how he
had discovered a very rare species of fern in an inaccessible place,
and in his efforts to obtain it had lost his footing, and slipped
ignominiously into a neighbouring pond.
The sun soon dried me off, he added, but I m afraid my appearance is
very disreputable.
At this juncture, Mrs. Inglethorp called to Cynthia from the hall, and
the girl ran out.
Just carry up my despatch case, will you, dear? I m going to bed.
The door into the hall was a wide one. I had risen when Cynthia did,
John was close by me. There were therefore three witnesses who could
swear that Mrs. Inglethorp was carrying her coffee, as yet untasted, in
her hand.
My evening was utterly and entirely spoilt by the presence of Dr.
Bauerstein. It seemed to me the man would never go. He rose at last,
however, and I breathed a sigh of relief.
I ll walk down to the village with you, said Mr. Inglethorp. I must
see our agent over those estate accounts. He turned to John. No one
need sit up. I will take the latch key.
CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY
To make this part of my story clear, I append the following plan of the
first floor of Styles. The servants rooms are reached through the door
B. They have no communication with the right wing, where the
Inglethorps rooms were situated.
01
It seemed to be the middle of the night when I was awakened by Lawrence
Cavendish. He had a candle in his hand, and the agitation of his face
told me at once that something was seriously wrong.
What s the matter? I asked, sitting up in bed, and trying to collect
my scattered thoughts.
We are afraid my mother is very ill. She seems to be having some kind
of fit. Unfortunately she has locked herself in.
I ll come at once.
I sprang out of bed; and, pulling on a dressing gown, followed Lawrence
along the passage and the gallery to the right wing of the house.
John Cavendish joined us, and one or two of the servants were standing
round in a state of awe stricken excitement. Lawrence turned to his
brother.
What do you think we had better do?
Never, I thought, had his indecision of character been more apparent.
John rattled the handle of Mrs. Inglethorp s door violently, but with
no effect. It was obviously locked or bolted on the inside. The whole
household was aroused by now. The most alarming sounds were audible
from the interior of the room. Clearly something must be done.
Try going through Mr. Inglethorp s room, sir, cried Dorcas. Oh, the
poor mistress!
Suddenly I realized that Alfred Inglethorp was not with us that he
alone had given no sign of his presence. John opened the door of his
room. It was pitch dark, but Lawrence was following with the candle,
and by its feeble light we saw that the bed had not been slept in, and
that there was no sign of the room having been occupied.
We went straight to the connecting door. That, too, was locked or
bolted on the inside. What was to be done?
Oh, dear, sir, cried Dorcas, wringing her hands, what ever shall we
do?
We must try and break the door in, I suppose. It ll be a tough job,
though. Here, let one of the maids go down and wake Baily and tell him
to go for Dr. Wilkins at once. Now then, we ll have a try at the door.
Half a moment, though, isn t there a door into Miss Cynthia s rooms?
Yes, sir, but that s always bolted. It s never been undone.
Well, we might just see.
He ran rapidly down the corridor to Cynthia s room. Mary Cavendish was
there, shaking the girl who must have been an unusually sound
sleeper and trying to wake her.
In a moment or two he was back.
No good. That s bolted too. We must break in the door. I think this
one is a shade less solid than the one in the passage.
We strained and heaved together. The framework of the door was solid,
and for a long time it resisted our efforts, but at last we felt it
give beneath our weight, and finally, with a resounding crash, it was
burst open.
We stumbled in together, Lawrence still holding his candle. Mrs.
Inglethorp was lying on the bed, her whole form agitated by violent
convulsions, in one of which she must have overturned the table beside
her. As we entered, however, her limbs relaxed, and she fell back upon
the pillows.
John strode across the room, and lit the gas. Turning to Annie, one of
the housemaids, he sent her downstairs to the dining room for brandy.
Then he went across to his mother whilst I unbolted the door that gave
on the corridor.
I turned to Lawrence, to suggest that I had better leave them now that
there was no further need of my services, but the words were frozen on
my lips. Never have I seen such a ghastly look on any man s face. He
was white as chalk, the candle he held in his shaking hand was
sputtering onto the carpet, and his eyes, petrified with terror, or
some such kindred emotion, stared fixedly over my head at a point on
the further wall. It was as though he had seen something that turned
him to stone. I instinctively followed the direction of his eyes, but I
could see nothing unusual. The still feebly flickering ashes in the
grate, and the row of prim ornaments on the mantelpiece, were surely
harmless enough.
The violence of Mrs. Inglethorp s attack seemed to be passing. She was
able to speak in short gasps.
Better now very sudden stupid of me to lock myself in.
A shadow fell on the bed and, looking up, I saw Mary Cavendish standing
near the door with her arm around Cynthia. She seemed to be supporting
the girl, who looked utterly dazed and unlike herself. Her face was
heavily flushed, and she yawned repeatedly.
Poor Cynthia is quite frightened, said Mrs. Cavendish in a low clear
voice. She herself, I noticed, was dressed in her white land smock.
Then it must be later than I thought. I saw that a faint streak of
daylight was showing through the curtains of the windows, and that the
clock on the mantelpiece pointed to close upon five o clock.
A strangled cry from the bed startled me. A fresh access of pain seized
the unfortunate old lady. The convulsions were of a violence terrible
to behold. Everything was confusion. We thronged round her, powerless
to help or alleviate. A final convulsion lifted her from the bed, until
she appeared to rest upon her head and her heels, with her body arched
in an extraordinary manner. In vain Mary and John tried to administer
more brandy. The moments flew. Again the body arched itself in that
peculiar fashion.
At that moment, Dr. Bauerstein pushed his way authoritatively into the
room. For one instant he stopped dead, staring at the figure on the
bed, and, at the same instant, Mrs. Inglethorp cried out in a strangled
voice, her eyes fixed on the doctor:
Alfred Alfred Then she fell back motionless on the pillows.
With a stride, the doctor reached the bed, and seizing her arms worked
them energetically, applying what I knew to be artificial respiration.
He issued a few short sharp orders to the servants. An imperious wave
of his hand drove us all to the door. We watched him, fascinated,
though I think we all knew in our hearts that it was too late, and that
nothing could be done now. I could see by the expression on his face
that he himself had little hope.
Finally he abandoned his task, shaking his head gravely. At that
moment, we heard footsteps outside, and Dr. Wilkins, Mrs. Inglethorp s
own doctor, a portly, fussy little man, came bustling in.
In a few words Dr. Bauerstein explained how he had happened to be
passing the lodge gates as the car came out, and had run up to the
house as fast as he could, whilst the car went on to fetch Dr. Wilkins.
With a faint gesture of the hand, he indicated the figure on the bed.
Ve ry sad. Ve ry sad, murmured Dr. Wilkins. Poor dear lady. Always
did far too much far too much against my advice. I warned her. Her
heart was far from strong. Take it easy, I said to her,
Take it easy . But no her zeal for good works was too great. Nature
rebelled. Na ture re belled.
Dr. Bauerstein, I noticed, was watching the local doctor narrowly. He
still kept his eyes fixed on him as he spoke.
The convulsions were of a peculiar violence, Dr. Wilkins. I am sorry
you were not here in time to witness them. They were quite tetanic in
character.
Ah! said Dr. Wilkins wisely.
I should like to speak to you in private, said Dr. Bauerstein. He
turned to John. You do not object?
Certainly not.
We all trooped out into the corridor, leaving the two doctors alone,
and I heard the key turned in the lock behind us.
We went slowly down the stairs. I was violently excited. I have a
certain talent for deduction, and Dr. Bauerstein s manner had started a
flock of wild surmises in my mind. Mary Cavendish laid her hand upon my
arm.
What is it? Why did Dr. Bauerstein seem so peculiar?
I looked at her.
Do you know what I think?
What?
Listen! I looked round, the others were out of earshot. I lowered my
voice to a whisper. I believe she has been poisoned! I m certain Dr.
Bauerstein suspects it.
What? She shrank against the wall, the pupils of her eyes dilating
wildly. Then, with a sudden cry that startled me, she cried out: No,
no not that not that! And breaking from me, fled up the stairs. I
followed her, afraid that she was going to faint. I found her leaning
against the bannisters, deadly pale. She waved me away impatiently.
No, no leave me. I d rather be alone. Let me just be quiet for a
minute or two. Go down to the others.
I obeyed her reluctantly. John and Lawrence were in the dining room. I
joined them. We were all silent, but I suppose I voiced the thoughts of
us all when I at last broke it by saying:
Where is Mr. Inglethorp?
John shook his head.
He s not in the house.
Our eyes met. Where was Alfred Inglethorp? His absence was strange
and inexplicable. I remembered Mrs. Inglethorp s dying words. What lay
beneath them? What more could she have told us, if she had had time?
At last we heard the doctors descending the stairs. Dr. Wilkins was
looking important and excited, and trying to conceal an inward
exultation under a manner of decorous calm. Dr. Bauerstein remained in
the background, his grave bearded face unchanged. Dr. Wilkins was the
spokesman for the two. He addressed himself to John:
Mr. Cavendish, I should like your consent to a post mortem.
Is that necessary? asked John gravely. A spasm of pain crossed his
face.
Absolutely, said Dr. Bauerstein.
You mean by that ?
That neither Dr. Wilkins nor myself could give a death certificate
under the circumstances.
John bent his head.
In that case, I have no alternative but to agree.
Thank you, said Dr. Wilkins briskly. We propose that it should take
place to morrow night or rather to night. And he glanced at the
daylight. Under the circumstances, I am afraid an inquest can hardly
be avoided these formalities are necessary, but I beg that you won t
distress yourselves.
There was a pause, and then Dr. Bauerstein drew two keys from his
pocket, and handed them to John.
These are the keys of the two rooms. I have locked them and, in my
opinion, they would be better kept locked for the present.
The doctors then departed.
I had been turning over an idea in my head, and I felt that the moment
had now come to broach it. Yet I was a little chary of doing so. John,
I knew, had a horror of any kind of publicity, and was an easygoing
optimist, who preferred never to meet trouble half way. It might be
difficult to convince him of the soundness of my plan. Lawrence, on the
other hand, being less conventional, and having more imagination, I
felt I might count upon as an ally. There was no doubt that the moment
had come for me to take the lead.
John, I said, I am going to ask you something.
Well?
You remember my speaking of my friend Poirot? The Belgian who is here?
He has been a most famous detective.
Yes.
I want you to let me call him in to investigate this matter.
What now? Before the post mortem?
Yes, time is an advantage if if there has been foul play.
Rubbish! cried Lawrence angrily. In my opinion the whole thing is a
mare s nest of Bauerstein s! Wilkins hadn t an idea of such a thing,
until Bauerstein put it into his head. But, like all specialists,
Bauerstein s got a bee in his bonnet. Poisons are his hobby, so of
course he sees them everywhere.
I confess that I was surprised by Lawrence s attitude. He was so seldom
vehement about anything.
John hesitated.
I can t feel as you do, Lawrence, he said at last. I m inclined to
give Hastings a free hand, though I should prefer to wait a bit. We
don t want any unnecessary scandal.
No, no, I cried eagerly, you need have no fear of that. Poirot is
discretion itself.
Very well, then, have it your own way. I leave it in your hands.
Though, if it is as we suspect, it seems a clear enough case. God
forgive me if I am wronging him!
I looked at my watch. It was six o clock. I determined to lose no time.
Five minutes delay, however, I allowed myself. I spent it in
ransacking the library until I discovered a medical book which gave a
description of strychnine poisoning.
CHAPTER IV. POIROT INVESTIGATES
The house which the Belgians occupied in the village was quite close to
the park gates. One could save time by taking a narrow path through the
long grass, which cut off the detours of the winding drive. So I,
accordingly, went that way. I had nearly reached the lodge, when my
attention was arrested by the running figure of a man approaching me.
It was Mr. Inglethorp. Where had he been? How did he intend to explain
his absence?
He accosted me eagerly.
My God! This is terrible! My poor wife! I have only just heard.
Where have you been? I asked.
Denby kept me late last night. It was one o clock before we d
finished. Then I found that I d forgotten the latch key after all. I
didn t want to arouse the household, so Denby gave me a bed.
How did you hear the news? I asked.
Wilkins knocked Denby up to tell him. My poor Emily! She was so
self sacrificing such a noble character. She over taxed her strength.
A wave of revulsion swept over me. What a consummate hypocrite the man
was!
I must hurry on, I said, thankful that he did not ask me whither I
was bound.
In a few minutes I was knocking at the door of Leastways Cottage.
Getting no answer, I repeated my summons impatiently. A window above me
was cautiously opened, and Poirot himself looked out.
He gave an exclamation of surprise at seeing me. In a few brief words,
I explained the tragedy that had occurred, and that I wanted his help.
Wait, my friend, I will let you in, and you shall recount to me the
affair whilst I dress.
In a few moments he had unbarred the door, and I followed him up to his
room. There he installed me in a chair, and I related the whole story,
keeping back nothing, and omitting no circumstance, however
insignificant, whilst he himself made a careful and deliberate toilet.
I told him of my awakening, of Mrs. Inglethorp s dying words, of her
husband s absence, of the quarrel the day before, of the scrap of
conversation between Mary and her mother in law that I had overheard,
of the former quarrel between Mrs. Inglethorp and Evelyn Howard, and of
the latter s innuendoes.
I was hardly as clear as I could wish. I repeated myself several times,
and occasionally had to go back to some detail that I had forgotten.
Poirot smiled kindly on me.
The mind is confused? Is it not so? Take time, mon ami . You are
agitated; you are excited it is but natural. Presently, when we are
calmer, we will arrange the facts, neatly, each in his proper place. We
will examine and reject. Those of importance we will put on one side;
those of no importance, pouf! he screwed up his cherub like face, and
puffed comically enough blow them away!
That s all very well, I objected, but how are you going to decide
what is important, and what isn t? That always seems the difficulty to
me.
Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustache
with exquisite care.
Not so. Voyons! One fact leads to another so we continue. Does the
next fit in with that? A merveille! Good! We can proceed. This next
little fact no! Ah, that is curious! There is something missing a link
in the chain that is not there. We examine. We search. And that little
curious fact, that possibly paltry little detail that will not tally,
we put it here! He made an extravagant gesture with his hand. It is
significant! It is tremendous!
Y es
Ah! Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailed
before it. Beware! Peril to the detective who says: It is so small it
does not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it. That way lies
confusion! Everything matters.
I know. You always told me that. That s why I have gone into all the
details of this thing whether they seemed to me relevant or not.
And I am pleased with you. You have a good memory, and you have given
me the facts faithfully. Of the order in which you present them, I say
nothing truly, it is deplorable! But I make allowances you are upset.
To that I attribute the circumstance that you have omitted one fact of
paramount importance.
What is that? I asked.
You have not told me if Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night.
I stared at him. Surely the war had affected the little man s brain. He
was carefully engaged in brushing his coat before putting it on, and
seemed wholly engrossed in the task.
I don t remember, I said. And, anyway, I don t see
You do not see? But it is of the first importance.
I can t see why, I said, rather nettled. As far as I can remember,
she didn t eat much. She was obviously upset, and it had taken her
appetite away. That was only natural.
Yes, said Poirot thoughtfully, it was only natural.
He opened a drawer, and took out a small despatch case, then turned to
me.
Now I am ready. We will proceed to the ch teau, and study matters on
the spot. Excuse me, mon ami , you dressed in haste, and your tie is
on one side. Permit me. With a deft gesture, he rearranged it.
a y est! Now, shall we start?
We hurried up the village, and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirot
stopped for a moment, and gazed sorrowfully over the beautiful expanse
of park, still glittering with morning dew.
So beautiful, so beautiful, and yet, the poor family, plunged in
sorrow, prostrated with grief.
He looked at me keenly as he spoke, and I was aware that I reddened
under his prolonged gaze.
Was the family prostrated by grief? Was the sorrow at Mrs. Inglethorp s
death so great? I realized that there was an emotional lack in the
atmosphere. The dead woman had not the gift of commanding love. Her
death was a shock and a distress, but she would not be passionately
regretted.
Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.
No, you are right, he said, it is not as though there was a blood
tie. She has been kind and generous to these Cavendishes, but she was
not their own mother. Blood tells always remember that blood tells.
Poirot, I said, I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know if
Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night? I have been turning it over in my
mind, but I can t see how it has anything to do with the matter?
He was silent for a minute or two as we walked along, but finally he
said:
I do not mind telling you though, as you know, it is not my habit to
explain until the end is reached. The present contention is that Mrs.
Inglethorp died of strychnine poisoning, presumably administered in her
coffee.
Yes?
Well, what time was the coffee served?
About eight o clock.
Therefore she drank it between then and half past eight certainly not
much later. Well, strychnine is a fairly rapid poison. Its effects
would be felt very soon, probably in about an hour. Yet, in Mrs.
Inglethorp s case, the symptoms do not manifest themselves until five
o clock the next morning: nine hours! But a heavy meal, taken at about
the same time as the poison, might retard its effects, though hardly to
that extent. Still, it is a possibility to be taken into account. But,
according to you, she ate very little for supper, and yet the symptoms
do not develop until early the next morning! Now that is a curious
circumstance, my friend. Something may arise at the autopsy to explain
it. In the meantime, remember it.
As we neared the house, John came out and met us. His face looked weary
and haggard.
This is a very dreadful business, Monsieur Poirot, he said. Hastings
has explained to you that we are anxious for no publicity?
I comprehend perfectly.
You see, it is only suspicion so far. We have nothing to go upon.
Precisely. It is a matter of precaution only.
John turned to me, taking out his cigarette case, and lighting a
cigarette as he did so.
You know that fellow Inglethorp is back?
Yes. I met him.
John flung the match into an adjacent flower bed, a proceeding which
was too much for Poirot s feelings. He retrieved it, and buried it
neatly.
It s jolly difficult to know how to treat him.
That difficulty will not exist long, pronounced Poirot quietly.
John looked puzzled, not quite understanding the portent of this
cryptic saying. He handed the two keys which Dr. Bauerstein had given
him to me.
Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.
The rooms are locked? asked Poirot.
Dr. Bauerstein considered it advisable.
Poirot nodded thoughtfully.
Then he is very sure. Well, that simplifies matters for us.
We went up together to the room of the tragedy. For convenience I
append a plan of the room and the principal articles of furniture in
it.
02
Poirot locked the door on the inside, and proceeded to a minute
inspection of the room. He darted from one object to the other with the
agility of a grasshopper. I remained by the door, fearing to obliterate
any clues. Poirot, however, did not seem grateful to me for my
forbearance.
What have you, my friend, he cried, that you remain there like how
do you say it? ah, yes, the stuck pig?
I explained that I was afraid of obliterating any foot marks.
Foot marks? But what an idea! There has already been practically an
army in the room! What foot marks are we likely to find? No, come here
and aid me in my search. I will put down my little case until I need
it.
He did so, on the round table by the window, but it was an ill advised
proceeding; for, the top of it being loose, it tilted up, and
precipitated the despatch case on the floor.
Eh voil une table! cried Poirot. Ah, my friend, one may live in a
big house and yet have no comfort.
After which piece of moralizing, he resumed his search.
A small purple despatch case, with a key in the lock, on the
writing table, engaged his attention for some time. He took out the key
from the lock, and passed it to me to inspect. I saw nothing peculiar,
however. It was an ordinary key of the Yale type, with a bit of twisted
wire through the handle.
Next, he examined the framework of the door we had broken in, assuring
himself that the bolt had really been shot. Then he went to the door
opposite leading into Cynthia s room. That door was also bolted, as I
had stated. However, he went to the length of unbolting it, and opening
and shutting it several times; this he did with the utmost precaution
against making any noise. Suddenly something in the bolt itself seemed
to rivet his attention. He examined it carefully, and then, nimbly
whipping out a pair of small forceps from his case, he drew out some
minute particle which he carefully sealed up in a tiny envelope.
On the chest of drawers there was a tray with a spirit lamp and a small
saucepan on it. A small quantity of a dark fluid remained in the
saucepan, and an empty cup and saucer that had been drunk out of stood
near it.
I wondered how I could have been so unobservant as to overlook this.
Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger into
liquid, and tasted it gingerly. He made a grimace.
Cocoa with I think rum in it.
He passed on to the debris on the floor, where the table by the bed had
been overturned. A reading lamp, some books, matches, a bunch of keys,
and the crushed fragments of a coffee cup lay scattered about.
Ah, this is curious, said Poirot.
I must confess that I see nothing particularly curious about it.
You do not? Observe the lamp the chimney is broken in two places; they
lie there as they fell. But see, the coffee cup is absolutely smashed
to powder.
Well, I said wearily, I suppose someone must have stepped on it.
Exactly, said Poirot, in an odd voice. Someone stepped on it.
He rose from his knees, and walked slowly across to the mantelpiece,
where he stood abstractedly fingering the ornaments, and straightening
them a trick of his when he was agitated.
Mon ami , he said, turning to me, somebody stepped on that cup,
grinding it to powder, and the reason they did so was either because it
contained strychnine or which is far more serious because it did not
contain strychnine!
I made no reply. I was bewildered, but I knew that it was no good
asking him to explain. In a moment or two he roused himself, and went
on with his investigations. He picked up the bunch of keys from the
floor, and twirling them round in his fingers finally selected one,
very bright and shining, which he tried in the lock of the purple
despatch case. It fitted, and he opened the box, but after a moment s
hesitation, closed and relocked it, and slipped the bunch of keys, as
well as the key that had originally stood in the lock, into his own
pocket.
I have no authority to go through these papers. But it should be
done at once!
He then made a very careful examination of the drawers of the
wash stand. Crossing the room to the left hand window, a round stain,
hardly visible on the dark brown carpet, seemed to interest him
particularly. He went down on his knees, examining it minutely even
going so far as to smell it.
Finally, he poured a few drops of the cocoa into a test tube, sealing
it up carefully. His next proceeding was to take out a little notebook.
We have found in this room, he said, writing busily, six points of
interest. Shall I enumerate them, or will you?
Oh, you, I replied hastily.
Very well, then. One, a coffee cup that has been ground into powder;
two, a despatch case with a key in the lock; three, a stain on the
floor.
That may have been done some time ago, I interrupted.
No, for it is still perceptibly damp and smells of coffee. Four, a
fragment of some dark green fabric only a thread or two, but
recognizable.
Ah! I cried. That was what you sealed up in the envelope.
Yes. It may turn out to be a piece of one of Mrs. Inglethorp s own
dresses, and quite unimportant. We shall see. Five, this ! With a
dramatic gesture, he pointed to a large splash of candle grease on the
floor by the writing table. It must have been done since yesterday,
otherwise a good housemaid would have at once removed it with
blotting paper and a hot iron. One of my best hats once but that is not
to the point.
It was very likely done last night. We were very agitated. Or perhaps
Mrs. Inglethorp herself dropped her candle.
You brought only one candle into the room?
Yes. Lawrence Cavendish was carrying it. But he was very upset. He
seemed to see something over here I indicated the mantelpiece that
absolutely paralysed him.
That is interesting, said Poirot quickly. Yes, it is suggestive his
eye sweeping the whole length of the wall but it was not his candle
that made this great patch, for you perceive that this is white grease;
whereas Monsieur Lawrence s candle, which is still on the
dressing table, is pink. On the other hand, Mrs. Inglethorp had no
candlestick in the room, only a reading lamp.
Then, I said, what do you deduce?
To which my friend only made a rather irritating reply, urging me to
use my own natural faculties.
And the sixth point? I asked. I suppose it is the sample of cocoa.
No, said Poirot thoughtfully. I might have included that in the six,
but I did not. No, the sixth point I will keep to myself for the
present.
He looked quickly round the room. There is nothing more to be done
here, I think, unless he stared earnestly and long at the dead ashes
in the grate. The fire burns and it destroys. But by chance there
might be let us see!
Deftly, on hands and knees, he began to sort the ashes from the grate
into the fender, handling them with the greatest caution. Suddenly, he
gave a faint exclamation.
The forceps, Hastings!
I quickly handed them to him, and with skill he extracted a small piece
of half charred paper.
There, mon ami! he cried. What do you think of that?
I scrutinized the fragment. This is an exact reproduction of it:
03
I was puzzled. It was unusually thick, quite unlike ordinary notepaper.
Suddenly an idea struck me.
Poirot! I cried. This is a fragment of a will!
Exactly.
I looked up at him sharply.
You are not surprised?
No, he said gravely, I expected it.
I relinquished the piece of paper, and watched him put it away in his
case, with the same methodical care that he bestowed on everything. My
brain was in a whirl. What was this complication of a will? Who had
destroyed it? The person who had left the candle grease on the floor?
Obviously. But how had anyone gained admission? All the doors had been
bolted on the inside.
Now, my friend, said Poirot briskly, we will go. I should like to
ask a few questions of the parlourmaid Dorcas, her name is, is it not?
We passed through Alfred Inglethorp s room, and Poirot delayed long
enough to make a brief but fairly comprehensive examination of it. We
went out through that door, locking both it and that of Mrs.
Inglethorp s room as before.
I took him down to the boudoir which he had expressed a wish to see,
and went myself in search of Dorcas.
When I returned with her, however, the boudoir was empty.
Poirot, I cried, where are you?
I am here, my friend.
He had stepped outside the French window, and was standing, apparently
lost in admiration, before the various shaped flower beds.
Admirable! he murmured. Admirable! What symmetry! Observe that
crescent; and those diamonds their neatness rejoices the eye. The
spacing of the plants, also, is perfect. It has been recently done; is
it not so?
Yes, I believe they were at it yesterday afternoon. But come in Dorcas
is here.
Eh bien, eh bien! Do not grudge me a moment s satisfaction of the
eye.
Yes, but this affair is more important.
And how do you know that these fine begonias are not of equal
importance?
I shrugged my shoulders. There was really no arguing with him if he
chose to take that line.
You do not agree? But such things have been. Well, we will come in and
interview the brave Dorcas.
Dorcas was standing in the boudoir, her hands folded in front of her,
and her grey hair rose in stiff waves under her white cap. She was the
very model and picture of a good old fashioned servant.
In her attitude towards Poirot, she was inclined to be suspicious, but
he soon broke down her defences. He drew forward a chair.
Pray be seated, mademoiselle.
Thank you, sir.
You have been with your mistress many years, is it not so?
Ten years, sir.
That is a long time, and very faithful service. You were much attached
to her, were you not?
She was a very good mistress to me, sir.
Then you will not object to answering a few questions. I put them to
you with Mr. Cavendish s full approval.
Oh, certainly, sir.
Then I will begin by asking you about the events of yesterday
afternoon. Your mistress had a quarrel?
Yes, sir. But I don t know that I ought Dorcas hesitated.
Poirot looked at her keenly.
My good Dorcas, it is necessary that I should know every detail of
that quarrel as fully as possible. Do not think that you are betraying
your mistress s secrets. Your mistress lies dead, and it is necessary
that we should know all if we are to avenge her. Nothing can bring her
back to life, but we do hope, if there has been foul play, to bring the
murderer to justice.
Amen to that, said Dorcas fiercely. And, naming no names, there s
one in this house that none of us could ever abide! And an ill day it
was when first he darkened the threshold.
Poirot waited for her indignation to subside, and then, resuming his
business like tone, he asked:
Now, as to this quarrel? What is the first you heard of it?
Well, sir, I happened to be going along the hall outside yesterday
What time was that?
I couldn t say exactly, sir, but it wasn t tea time by a long way.
Perhaps four o clock or it may have been a bit later. Well, sir, as I
said, I happened to be passing along, when I heard voices very loud and
angry in here. I didn t exactly mean to listen, but well, there it is.
I stopped. The door was shut, but the mistress was speaking very sharp
and clear, and I heard what she said quite plainly. You have lied to
me, and deceived me, she said. I didn t hear what Mr. Inglethorp
replied. He spoke a good bit lower than she did but she answered: How
dare you? I have kept you and clothed you and fed you! You owe
everything to me! And this is how you repay me! By bringing disgrace
upon our name! Again I didn t hear what he said, but she went on:
Nothing that you can say will make any difference. I see my duty
clearly. My mind is made up. You need not think that any fear of
publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me. Then I
thought I heard them coming out, so I went off quickly.
You are sure it was Mr. Inglethorp s voice you heard?
Oh, yes, sir, whose else s could it be?
Well, what happened next?
Later, I came back to the hall; but it was all quiet. At five o clock,
Mrs. Inglethorp rang the bell and told me to bring her a cup of
tea nothing to eat to the boudoir. She was looking dreadful so white
and upset. Dorcas, she says, I ve had a great shock. I m sorry for
that, m m, I says. You ll feel better after a nice hot cup of tea,
m m. She had something in her hand. I don t know if it was a letter,
or just a piece of paper, but it had writing on it, and she kept
staring at it, almost as if she couldn t believe what was written
there. She whispered to herself, as though she had forgotten I was
there: These few words and everything s changed. And then she says to
me: Never trust a man, Dorcas, they re not worth it! I hurried off,
and got her a good strong cup of tea, and she thanked me, and said
she d feel better when she d drunk it. I don t know what to do, she
says. Scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing, Dorcas.
I d rather hush it up if I could. Mrs. Cavendish came in just then, so
she didn t say any more.
She still had the letter, or whatever it was, in her hand?
Yes, sir.
What would she be likely to do with it afterwards?
Well, I don t know, sir, I expect she would lock it up in that purple
case of hers.
Is that where she usually kept important papers?
Yes, sir. She brought it down with her every morning, and took it up
every night.
When did she lose the key of it?
She missed it yesterday at lunch time, sir, and told me to look
carefully for it. She was very much put out about it.
But she had a duplicate key?
Oh, yes, sir.
Dorcas was looking very curiously at him and, to tell the truth, so was
I. What was all this about a lost key? Poirot smiled.
Never mind, Dorcas, it is my business to know things. Is this the key
that was lost? He drew from his pocket the key that he had found in
the lock of the despatch case upstairs.
Dorcas s eyes looked as though they would pop out of her head.
That s it, sir, right enough. But where did you find it? I looked
everywhere for it.
Ah, but you see it was not in the same place yesterday as it was
to day. Now, to pass to another subject, had your mistress a dark green
dress in her wardrobe?
Dorcas was rather startled by the unexpected question.
No, sir.
Are you quite sure?
Oh, yes, sir.
Has anyone else in the house got a green dress?
Dorcas reflected.
Miss Cynthia has a green evening dress.
Light or dark green?
A light green, sir; a sort of chiffon, they call it.
Ah, that is not what I want. And nobody else has anything green?
No, sir not that I know of.
Poirot s face did not betray a trace of whether he was disappointed or
otherwise. He merely remarked:
Good, we will leave that and pass on. Have you any reason to believe
that your mistress was likely to take a sleeping powder last night?
Not last night, sir, I know she didn t.
Why do you know so positively?
Because the box was empty. She took the last one two days ago, and she
didn t have any more made up.
You are quite sure of that?
Positive, sir.
Then that is cleared up! By the way, your mistress didn t ask you to
sign any paper yesterday?
To sign a paper? No, sir.
When Mr. Hastings and Mr. Lawrence came in yesterday evening, they
found your mistress busy writing letters. I suppose you can give me no
idea to whom these letters were addressed?
I m afraid I couldn t, sir. I was out in the evening. Perhaps Annie
could tell you, though she s a careless girl. Never cleared the
coffee cups away last night. That s what happens when I m not here to
look after things.
Poirot lifted his hand.
Since they have been left, Dorcas, leave them a little longer, I pray
you. I should like to examine them.
Very well, sir.
What time did you go out last evening?
About six o clock, sir.
Thank you, Dorcas, that is all I have to ask you. He rose and
strolled to the window. I have been admiring these flower beds. How
many gardeners are employed here, by the way?
Only three now, sir. Five, we had, before the war, when it was kept as
a gentleman s place should be. I wish you could have seen it then, sir.
A fair sight it was. But now there s only old Manning, and young
William, and a new fashioned woman gardener in breeches and such like.
Ah, these are dreadful times!
The good times will come again, Dorcas. At least, we hope so. Now,
will you send Annie to me here?
Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.
How did you know that Mrs. Inglethorp took sleeping powders? I asked,
in lively curiosity, as Dorcas left the room. And about the lost key
and the duplicate?
One thing at a time. As to the sleeping powders, I knew by this. He
suddenly produced a small cardboard box, such as chemists use for
powders.
Where did you find it?
In the wash stand drawer in Mrs. Inglethorp s bedroom. It was Number
Six of my catalogue.
But I suppose, as the last powder was taken two days ago, it is not of
much importance?
Probably not, but do you notice anything that strikes you as peculiar
about this box?
I examined it closely.
No, I can t say that I do.
Look at the label.
I read the label carefully: One powder to be taken at bedtime, if
required. Mrs. Inglethorp. No, I see nothing unusual.
Not the fact that there is no chemist s name?
Ah! I exclaimed. To be sure, that is odd!
Have you ever known a chemist to send out a box like that, without his
printed name?
No, I can t say that I have.
I was becoming quite excited, but Poirot damped my ardour by remarking:
Yet the explanation is quite simple. So do not intrigue yourself, my
friend.
An audible creaking proclaimed the approach of Annie, so I had no time
to reply.
Annie was a fine, strapping girl, and was evidently labouring under
intense excitement, mingled with a certain ghoulish enjoyment of the
tragedy.
Poirot came to the point at once, with a business like briskness.
I sent for you, Annie, because I thought you might be able to tell me
something about the letters Mrs. Inglethorp wrote last night. How many
were there? And can you tell me any of the names and addresses?
Annie considered.
There were four letters, sir. One was to Miss Howard, and one was to
Mr. Wells, the lawyer, and the other two I don t think I remember,
sir oh, yes, one was to Ross s, the caterers in Tadminster. The other
one, I don t remember.
Think, urged Poirot.
Annie racked her brains in vain.
I m sorry, sir, but it s clean gone. I don t think I can have noticed
it.
It does not matter, said Poirot, not betraying any sign of
disappointment. Now I want to ask you about something else. There is a
saucepan in Mrs. Inglethorp s room with some cocoa in it. Did she have
that every night?
Yes, sir, it was put in her room every evening, and she warmed it up
in the night whenever she fancied it.
What was it? Plain cocoa?
Yes, sir, made with milk, with a teaspoonful of sugar, and two
teaspoonfuls of rum in it.
Who took it to her room?
I did, sir.
Always?
Yes, sir.
At what time?
When I went to draw the curtains, as a rule, sir.
Did you bring it straight up from the kitchen then?
No, sir, you see there s not much room on the gas stove, so cook used
to make it early, before putting the vegetables on for supper. Then I
used to bring it up, and put it on the table by the swing door, and
take it into her room later.
The swing door is in the left wing, is it not?
Yes, sir.
And the table, is it on this side of the door, or on the
farther servants side?
It s this side, sir.
What time did you bring it up last night?
About quarter past seven, I should say, sir.
And when did you take it into Mrs. Inglethorp s room?
When I went to shut up, sir. About eight o clock. Mrs. Inglethorp came
up to bed before I d finished.
Then, between seven fifteen and eight o clock, the cocoa was standing
on the table in the left wing?
Yes, sir. Annie had been growing redder and redder in the face, and
now she blurted out unexpectedly:
And if there was salt in it, sir, it wasn t me. I never took the
salt near it.
What makes you think there was salt in it? asked Poirot.
Seeing it on the tray, sir.
You saw some salt on the tray?
Yes. Coarse kitchen salt, it looked. I never noticed it when I took
the tray up, but when I came to take it into the mistress s room I saw
it at once, and I suppose I ought to have taken it down again, and
asked cook to make some fresh. But I was in a hurry, because Dorcas was
out, and I thought maybe the cocoa itself was all right, and the salt
had only gone on the tray. So I dusted it off with my apron, and took
it in.
I had the utmost difficulty in controlling my excitement. Unknown to
herself, Annie had provided us with an important piece of evidence. How
she would have gaped if she had realized that her coarse kitchen salt
was strychnine, one of the most deadly poisons known to mankind. I
marvelled at Poirot s calm. His self control was astonishing. I awaited
his next question with impatience, but it disappointed me.
When you went into Mrs. Inglethorp s room, was the door leading into
Miss Cynthia s room bolted?
Oh! Yes, sir; it always was. It had never been opened.
And the door into Mr. Inglethorp s room? Did you notice if that was
bolted too?
Annie hesitated.
I couldn t rightly say, sir; it was shut but I couldn t say whether it
was bolted or not.
When you finally left the room, did Mrs. Inglethorp bolt the door
after you?
No, sir, not then, but I expect she did later. She usually did lock it
at night. The door into the passage, that is.
Did you notice any candle grease on the floor when you did the room
yesterday?
Candle grease? Oh, no, sir. Mrs. Inglethorp didn t have a candle, only
a reading lamp.
Then, if there had been a large patch of candle grease on the floor,
you think you would have been sure to have seen it?
Yes, sir, and I would have taken it out with a piece of blotting paper
and a hot iron.
Then Poirot repeated the question he had put to Dorcas:
Did your mistress ever have a green dress?
No, sir.
Nor a mantle, nor a cape, nor a how do you call it? a sports coat?
Not green, sir.
Nor anyone else in the house?
Annie reflected.
No, sir.
You are sure of that?
Quite sure.
Bien! That is all I want to know. Thank you very much.
With a nervous giggle, Annie took herself creakingly out of the room.
My pent up excitement burst forth.
Poirot, I cried, I congratulate you! This is a great discovery.
What is a great discovery?
Why, that it was the cocoa and not the coffee that was poisoned. That
explains everything! Of course it did not take effect until the early
morning, since the cocoa was only drunk in the middle of the night.
So you think that the cocoa mark well what I say, Hastings, the
cocoa contained strychnine?
Of course! That salt on the tray, what else could it have been?
It might have been salt, replied Poirot placidly.
I shrugged my shoulders. If he was going to take the matter that way,
it was no good arguing with him. The idea crossed my mind, not for the
first time, that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thought
it lucky that he had associated with him someone of a more receptive
type of mind.
Poirot was surveying me with quietly twinkling eyes.
You are not pleased with me, mon ami?
My dear Poirot, I said coldly, it is not for me to dictate to you.
You have a right to your own opinion, just as I have to mine.
A most admirable sentiment, remarked Poirot, rising briskly to his
feet. Now I have finished with this room. By the way, whose is the
smaller desk in the corner?
Mr. Inglethorp s.
Ah! He tried the roll top tentatively. Locked. But perhaps one of
Mrs. Inglethorp s keys would open it. He tried several, twisting and
turning them with a practiced hand, and finally uttering an ejaculation
of satisfaction. Voil ! It is not the key, but it will open it at a
pinch. He slid back the roll top, and ran a rapid eye over the neatly
filed papers. To my surprise, he did not examine them, merely remarking
approvingly as he relocked the desk: Decidedly, he is a man of method,
this Mr. Inglethorp!
A man of method was, in Poirot s estimation, the highest praise that
could be bestowed on any individual.
I felt that my friend was not what he had been as he rambled on
disconnectedly:
There were no stamps in his desk, but there might have been, eh, mon
ami? There might have been? Yes his eyes wandered round the
room this boudoir has nothing more to tell us. It did not yield much.
Only this.
He pulled a crumpled envelope out of his pocket, and tossed it over to
me. It was rather a curious document. A plain, dirty looking old
envelope with a few words scrawled across it, apparently at random. The
following is a facsimile of it.
04
CHAPTER V. IT ISN T STRYCHNINE, IS IT?
Where did you find this? I asked Poirot, in lively curiosity.
In the waste paper basket. You recognise the handwriting?
Yes, it is Mrs. Inglethorp s. But what does it mean?
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
I cannot say but it is suggestive.
A wild idea flashed across me. Was it possible that Mrs. Inglethorp s
mind was deranged? Had she some fantastic idea of demoniacal
possession? And, if that were so, was it not also possible that she
might have taken her own life?
I was about to expound these theories to Poirot, when his own words
distracted me.
Come, he said, now to examine the coffee cups!
My dear Poirot! What on earth is the good of that, now that we know
about the cocoa?
Oh, l l ! That miserable cocoa! cried Poirot flippantly.
He laughed with apparent enjoyment, raising his arms to heaven in mock
despair, in what I could not but consider the worst possible taste.
And, anyway, I said, with increasing coldness, as Mrs. Inglethorp
took her coffee upstairs with her, I do not see what you expect to
find, unless you consider it likely that we shall discover a packet of
strychnine on the coffee tray!
Poirot was sobered at once.
Come, come, my friend, he said, slipping his arms through mine. Ne
vous f chez pas! Allow me to interest myself in my coffee cups, and I
will respect your cocoa. There! Is it a bargain?
He was so quaintly humorous that I was forced to laugh; and we went
together to the drawing room, where the coffee cups and tray remained
undisturbed as we had left them.
Poirot made me recapitulate the scene of the night before, listening
very carefully, and verifying the position of the various cups.
So Mrs. Cavendish stood by the tray and poured out. Yes. Then she came
across to the window where you sat with Mademoiselle Cynthia. Yes. Here
are the three cups. And the cup on the mantelpiece, half drunk, that
would be Mr. Lawrence Cavendish s. And the one on the tray?
John Cavendish s. I saw him put it down there.
Good. One, two, three, four, five but where, then, is the cup of Mr.
Inglethorp?
He does not take coffee.
Then all are accounted for. One moment, my friend.
With infinite care, he took a drop or two from the grounds in each cup,
sealing them up in separate test tubes, tasting each in turn as he did
so. His physiognomy underwent a curious change. An expression gathered
there that I can only describe as half puzzled, and half relieved.
Bien! he said at last. It is evident! I had an idea but clearly I
was mistaken. Yes, altogether I was mistaken. Yet it is strange. But no
matter!
And, with a characteristic shrug, he dismissed whatever it was that was
worrying him from his mind. I could have told him from the beginning
that this obsession of his over the coffee was bound to end in a blind
alley, but I restrained my tongue. After all, though he was old, Poirot
had been a great man in his day.
Breakfast is ready, said John Cavendish, coming in from the hall.
You will breakfast with us, Monsieur Poirot?
Poirot acquiesced. I observed John. Already he was almost restored to
his normal self. The shock of the events of the last night had upset
him temporarily, but his equable poise soon swung back to the normal.
He was a man of very little imagination, in sharp contrast with his
brother, who had, perhaps, too much.
Ever since the early hours of the morning, John had been hard at work,
sending telegrams one of the first had gone to Evelyn Howard writing
notices for the papers, and generally occupying himself with the
melancholy duties that a death entails.
May I ask how things are proceeding? he said. Do your investigations
point to my mother having died a natural death or or must we prepare
ourselves for the worst?
I think, Mr. Cavendish, said Poirot gravely, that you would do well
not to buoy yourself up with any false hopes. Can you tell me the views
of the other members of the family?
My brother Lawrence is convinced that we are making a fuss over
nothing. He says that everything points to its being a simple case of
heart failure.
He does, does he? That is very interesting very interesting, murmured
Poirot softly. And Mrs. Cavendish?
A faint cloud passed over John s face.
I have not the least idea what my wife s views on the subject are.
The answer brought a momentary stiffness in its train. John broke the
rather awkward silence by saying with a slight effort:
I told you, didn t I, that Mr. Inglethorp has returned?
Poirot bent his head.
It s an awkward position for all of us. Of course one has to treat him
as usual but, hang it all, one s gorge does rise at sitting down to eat
with a possible murderer!
Poirot nodded sympathetically.
I quite understand. It is a very difficult situation for you, Mr.
Cavendish. I would like to ask you one question. Mr. Inglethorp s
reason for not returning last night was, I believe, that he had
forgotten the latch key. Is not that so?
Yes.
I suppose you are quite sure that the latch key was forgotten that
he did not take it after all?
I have no idea. I never thought of looking. We always keep it in the
hall drawer. I ll go and see if it s there now.
Poirot held up his hand with a faint smile.
No, no, Mr. Cavendish, it is too late now. I am certain that you would
find it. If Mr. Inglethorp did take it, he has had ample time to
replace it by now.
But do you think
I think nothing. If anyone had chanced to look this morning before his
return, and seen it there, it would have been a valuable point in his
favour. That is all.
John looked perplexed.
Do not worry, said Poirot smoothly. I assure you that you need not
let it trouble you. Since you are so kind, let us go and have some
breakfast.
Everyone was assembled in the dining room. Under the circumstances, we
were naturally not a cheerful party. The reaction after a shock is
always trying, and I think we were all suffering from it. Decorum and
good breeding naturally enjoined that our demeanour should be much as
usual, yet I could not help wondering if this self control were really
a matter of great difficulty. There were no red eyes, no signs of
secretly indulged grief. I felt that I was right in my opinion that
Dorcas was the person most affected by the personal side of the
tragedy.
I pass over Alfred Inglethorp, who acted the bereaved widower in a
manner that I felt to be disgusting in its hypocrisy. Did he know that
we suspected him, I wondered. Surely he could not be unaware of the
fact, conceal it as we would. Did he feel some secret stirring of fear,
or was he confident that his crime would go unpunished? Surely the
suspicion in the atmosphere must warn him that he was already a marked
man.
But did everyone suspect him? What about Mrs. Cavendish? I watched her
as she sat at the head of the table, graceful, composed, enigmatic. In
her soft grey frock, with white ruffles at the wrists falling over her
slender hands, she looked very beautiful. When she chose, however, her
face could be sphinx like in its inscrutability. She was very silent,
hardly opening her lips, and yet in some queer way I felt that the
great strength of her personality was dominating us all.
And little Cynthia? Did she suspect? She looked very tired and ill, I
thought. The heaviness and languor of her manner were very marked. I
asked her if she were feeling ill, and she answered frankly:
Yes, I ve got the most beastly headache.
Have another cup of coffee, mademoiselle? said Poirot solicitously.
It will revive you. It is unparalleled for the mal de t te . He
jumped up and took her cup.
No sugar, said Cynthia, watching him, as he picked up the
sugar tongs.
No sugar? You abandon it in the war time, eh?
No, I never take it in coffee.
Sacr ! murmured Poirot to himself, as he brought back the
replenished cup.
Only I heard him, and glancing up curiously at the little man I saw
that his face was working with suppressed excitement, and his eyes were
as green as a cat s. He had heard or seen something that had affected
him strongly but what was it? I do not usually label myself as dense,
but I must confess that nothing out of the ordinary had attracted my
attention.
In another moment, the door opened and Dorcas appeared.
Mr. Wells to see you, sir, she said to John.
I remembered the name as being that of the lawyer to whom Mrs.
Inglethorp had written the night before.
John rose immediately.
Show him into my study. Then he turned to us. My mother s lawyer,
he explained. And in a lower voice: He is also Coroner you understand.
Perhaps you would like to come with me?
We acquiesced and followed him out of the room. John strode on ahead
and I took the opportunity of whispering to Poirot:
There will be an inquest then?
Poirot nodded absently. He seemed absorbed in thought; so much so that
my curiosity was aroused.
What is it? You are not attending to what I say.
It is true, my friend. I am much worried.
Why?
Because Mademoiselle Cynthia does not take sugar in her coffee.
What? You cannot be serious?
But I am most serious. Ah, there is something there that I do not
understand. My instinct was right.
What instinct?
The instinct that led me to insist on examining those coffee cups.
Chut! no more now!
We followed John into his study, and he closed the door behind us.
Mr. Wells was a pleasant man of middle age, with keen eyes, and the
typical lawyer s mouth. John introduced us both, and explained the
reason of our presence.
You will understand, Wells, he added, that this is all strictly
private. We are still hoping that there will turn out to be no need for
investigation of any kind.
Quite so, quite so, said Mr. Wells soothingly. I wish we could have
spared you the pain and publicity of an inquest, but of course it s
quite unavoidable in the absence of a doctor s certificate.
Yes, I suppose so.
Clever man, Bauerstein. Great authority on toxicology, I believe.
Indeed, said John with a certain stiffness in his manner. Then he
added rather hesitatingly: Shall we have to appear as witnesses all of
us, I mean?
You, of course and ah er Mr. er Inglethorp.
A slight pause ensued before the lawyer went on in his soothing manner:
Any other evidence will be simply confirmatory, a mere matter of
form.
I see.
A faint expression of relief swept over John s face. It puzzled me, for
I saw no occasion for it.
If you know of nothing to the contrary, pursued Mr. Wells, I had
thought of Friday. That will give us plenty of time for the doctor s
report. The post mortem is to take place to night, I believe?
Yes.
Then that arrangement will suit you?
Perfectly.
I need not tell you, my dear Cavendish, how distressed I am at this
most tragic affair.
Can you give us no help in solving it, monsieur? interposed Poirot,
speaking for the first time since we had entered the room.
I?
Yes, we heard that Mrs. Inglethorp wrote to you last night. You should
have received the letter this morning.
I did, but it contains no information. It is merely a note asking me
to call upon her this morning, as she wanted my advice on a matter of
great importance.
She gave you no hint as to what that matter might be?
Unfortunately, no.
That is a pity, said John.
A great pity, agreed Poirot gravely.
There was silence. Poirot remained lost in thought for a few minutes.
Finally he turned to the lawyer again.
Mr. Wells, there is one thing I should like to ask you that is, if it
is not against professional etiquette. In the event of Mrs.
Inglethorp s death, who would inherit her money?
The lawyer hesitated a moment, and then replied:
The knowledge will be public property very soon, so if Mr. Cavendish
does not object
Not at all, interpolated John.
I do not see any reason why I should not answer your question. By her
last will, dated August of last year, after various unimportant
legacies to servants, etc., she gave her entire fortune to her stepson,
Mr. John Cavendish.
Was not that pardon the question, Mr. Cavendish rather unfair to her
other stepson, Mr. Lawrence Cavendish?
No, I do not think so. You see, under the terms of their father s
will, while John inherited the property, Lawrence, at his stepmother s
death, would come into a considerable sum of money. Mrs. Inglethorp
left her money to her elder stepson, knowing that he would have to keep
up Styles. It was, to my mind, a very fair and equitable distribution.
Poirot nodded thoughtfully.
I see. But I am right in saying, am I not, that by your English law
that will was automatically revoked when Mrs. Inglethorp remarried?
Mr. Wells bowed his head.
As I was about to proceed, Monsieur Poirot, that document is now null
and void.
Hein! said Poirot. He reflected for a moment, and then asked: Was
Mrs. Inglethorp herself aware of that fact?
I do not know. She may have been.
She was, said John unexpectedly. We were discussing the matter of
wills being revoked by marriage only yesterday.
Ah! One more question, Mr. Wells. You say her last will. Had Mrs.
Inglethorp, then, made several former wills?
On an average, she made a new will at least once a year, said Mr.
Wells imperturbably. She was given to changing her mind as to her
testamentary dispositions, now benefiting one, now another member of
her family.
Suppose, suggested Poirot, that, unknown to you, she had made a new
will in favour of someone who was not, in any sense of the word, a
member of the family we will say Miss Howard, for instance would you be
surprised?
Not in the least.
Ah! Poirot seemed to have exhausted his questions.
I drew close to him, while John and the lawyer were debating the
question of going through Mrs. Inglethorp s papers.
Do you think Mrs. Inglethorp made a will leaving all her money to Miss
Howard? I asked in a low voice, with some curiosity.
Poirot smiled.
No.
Then why did you ask?
Hush!
John Cavendish had turned to Poirot.
Will you come with us, Monsieur Poirot? We are going through my
mother s papers. Mr. Inglethorp is quite willing to leave it entirely
to Mr. Wells and myself.
Which simplifies matters very much, murmured the lawyer. As
technically, of course, he was entitled He did not finish the
sentence.
We will look through the desk in the boudoir first, explained John,
and go up to her bedroom afterwards. She kept her most important
papers in a purple despatch case, which we must look through
carefully.
Yes, said the lawyer, it is quite possible that there may be a later
will than the one in my possession.
There is a later will. It was Poirot who spoke.
What? John and the lawyer looked at him startled.
Or, rather, pursued my friend imperturbably, there was one.
What do you mean there was one? Where is it now?
Burnt!
Burnt?
Yes. See here. He took out the charred fragment we had found in the
grate in Mrs. Inglethorp s room, and handed it to the lawyer with a
brief explanation of when and where he had found it.
But possibly this is an old will?
I do not think so. In fact I am almost certain that it was made no
earlier than yesterday afternoon.
What? Impossible! broke simultaneously from both men.
Poirot turned to John.
If you will allow me to send for your gardener, I will prove it to
you.
Oh, of course but I don t see
Poirot raised his hand.
Do as I ask you. Afterwards you shall question as much as you please.
Very well. He rang the bell.
Dorcas answered it in due course.
Dorcas, will you tell Manning to come round and speak to me here.
Yes, sir.
Dorcas withdrew.
We waited in a tense silence. Poirot alone seemed perfectly at his
ease, and dusted a forgotten corner of the bookcase.
The clumping of hobnailed boots on the gravel outside proclaimed the
approach of Manning. John looked questioningly at Poirot. The latter
nodded.
Come inside, Manning, said John, I want to speak to you.
Manning came slowly and hesitatingly through the French window, and
stood as near it as he could. He held his cap in his hands, twisting it
very carefully round and round. His back was much bent, though he was
probably not as old as he looked, but his eyes were sharp and
intelligent, and belied his slow and rather cautious speech.
Manning, said John, this gentleman will put some questions to you
which I want you to answer.
Yessir, mumbled Manning.
Poirot stepped forward briskly. Manning s eye swept over him with a
faint contempt.
You were planting a bed of begonias round by the south side of the
house yesterday afternoon, were you not, Manning?
Yes, sir, me and Willum.
And Mrs. Inglethorp came to the window and called you, did she not?
Yes, sir, she did.
Tell me in your own words exactly what happened after that.
Well, sir, nothing much. She just told Willum to go on his bicycle
down to the village, and bring back a form of will, or such like I
don t know what exactly she wrote it down for him.
Well?
Well, he did, sir.
And what happened next?
We went on with the begonias, sir.
Did not Mrs. Inglethorp call you again?
Yes, sir, both me and Willum, she called.
And then?
She made us come right in, and sign our names at the bottom of a long
paper under where she d signed.
Did you see anything of what was written above her signature? asked
Poirot sharply.
No, sir, there was a bit of blotting paper over that part.
And you signed where she told you?
Yes, sir, first me and then Willum.
What did she do with it afterwards?
Well, sir, she slipped it into a long envelope, and put it inside a
sort of purple box that was standing on the desk.
What time was it when she first called you?
About four, I should say, sir.
Not earlier? Couldn t it have been about half past three?
No, I shouldn t say so, sir. It would be more likely to be a bit after
four not before it.
Thank you, Manning, that will do, said Poirot pleasantly.
The gardener glanced at his master, who nodded, whereupon Manning
lifted a finger to his forehead with a low mumble, and backed
cautiously out of the window.
We all looked at each other.
Good heavens! murmured John. What an extraordinary coincidence.
How a coincidence?
That my mother should have made a will on the very day of her death!
Mr. Wells cleared his throat and remarked drily:
Are you so sure it is a coincidence, Cavendish?
What do you mean?
Your mother, you tell me, had a violent quarrel with someone yesterday
afternoon
What do you mean? cried John again. There was a tremor in his voice,
and he had gone very pale.
In consequence of that quarrel, your mother very suddenly and
hurriedly makes a new will. The contents of that will we shall never
know. She told no one of its provisions. This morning, no doubt, she
would have consulted me on the subject but she had no chance. The will
disappears, and she takes its secret with her to her grave. Cavendish,
I much fear there is no coincidence there. Monsieur Poirot, I am sure
you agree with me that the facts are very suggestive.
Suggestive, or not, interrupted John, we are most grateful to
Monsieur Poirot for elucidating the matter. But for him, we should
never have known of this will. I suppose, I may not ask you, monsieur,
what first led you to suspect the fact?
Poirot smiled and answered:
A scribbled over old envelope, and a freshly planted bed of begonias.
John, I think, would have pressed his questions further, but at that
moment the loud purr of a motor was audible, and we all turned to the
window as it swept past.
Evie! cried John. Excuse me, Wells. He went hurriedly out into the
hall.
Poirot looked inquiringly at me.
Miss Howard, I explained.
Ah, I am glad she has come. There is a woman with a head and a heart
too, Hastings. Though the good God gave her no beauty!
I followed John s example, and went out into the hall, where Miss
Howard was endeavouring to extricate herself from the voluminous mass
of veils that enveloped her head. As her eyes fell on me, a sudden pang
of guilt shot through me. This was the woman who had warned me so
earnestly, and to whose warning I had, alas, paid no heed! How soon,
and how contemptuously, I had dismissed it from my mind. Now that she
had been proved justified in so tragic a manner, I felt ashamed. She
had known Alfred Inglethorp only too well. I wondered whether, if she
had remained at Styles, the tragedy would have taken place, or would
the man have feared her watchful eyes?
I was relieved when she shook me by the hand, with her well remembered
painful grip. The eyes that met mine were sad, but not reproachful;
that she had been crying bitterly, I could tell by the redness of her
eyelids, but her manner was unchanged from its old gruffness.
Started the moment I got the wire. Just come off night duty. Hired
car. Quickest way to get here.
Have you had anything to eat this morning, Evie? asked John.
No.
I thought not. Come along, breakfast s not cleared away yet, and
they ll make you some fresh tea. He turned to me. Look after her,
Hastings, will you? Wells is waiting for me. Oh, here s Monsieur
Poirot. He s helping us, you know, Evie.
Miss Howard shook hands with Poirot, but glanced suspiciously over her
shoulder at John.
What do you mean helping us?
Helping us to investigate.
Nothing to investigate. Have they taken him to prison yet?
Taken who to prison?
Who? Alfred Inglethorp, of course!
My dear Evie, do be careful. Lawrence is of the opinion that my mother
died from heart seizure.
More fool, Lawrence! retorted Miss Howard. Of course Alfred
Inglethorp murdered poor Emily as I always told you he would.
My dear Evie, don t shout so. Whatever we may think or suspect, it is
better to say as little as possible for the present. The inquest isn t
until Friday.
Not until fiddlesticks! The snort Miss Howard gave was truly
magnificent. You re all off your heads. The man will be out of the
country by then. If he s any sense, he won t stay here tamely and wait
to be hanged.
John Cavendish looked at her helplessly.
I know what it is, she accused him, you ve been listening to the
doctors. Never should. What do they know? Nothing at all or just enough
to make them dangerous. I ought to know my own father was a doctor.
That little Wilkins is about the greatest fool that even I have ever
seen. Heart seizure! Sort of thing he would say. Anyone with any sense
could see at once that her husband had poisoned her. I always said he d
murder her in her bed, poor soul. Now he s done it. And all you can do
is to murmur silly things about heart seizure and inquest on
Friday. You ought to be ashamed of yourself, John Cavendish.
What do you want me to do? asked John, unable to help a faint smile.
Dash it all, Evie, I can t haul him down to the local police station
by the scruff of his neck.
Well, you might do something. Find out how he did it. He s a crafty
beggar. Dare say he soaked fly papers. Ask cook if she s missed any.
It occurred to me very forcibly at that moment that to harbour Miss
Howard and Alfred Inglethorp under the same roof, and keep the peace
between them, was likely to prove a Herculean task, and I did not envy
John. I could see by the expression of his face that he fully
appreciated the difficulty of the position. For the moment, he sought
refuge in retreat, and left the room precipitately.
Dorcas brought in fresh tea. As she left the room, Poirot came over
from the window where he had been standing, and sat down facing Miss
Howard.
Mademoiselle, he said gravely, I want to ask you something.
Ask away, said the lady, eyeing him with some disfavour.
I want to be able to count upon your help.
I ll help you to hang Alfred with pleasure, she replied gruffly.
Hanging s too good for him. Ought to be drawn and quartered, like in
good old times.
We are at one then, said Poirot, for I, too, want to hang the
criminal.
Alfred Inglethorp?
Him, or another.
No question of another. Poor Emily was never murdered until he came
along. I don t say she wasn t surrounded by sharks she was. But it was
only her purse they were after. Her life was safe enough. But along
comes Mr. Alfred Inglethorp and within two months hey presto!
Believe me, Miss Howard, said Poirot very earnestly, if Mr.
Inglethorp is the man, he shall not escape me. On my honour, I will
hang him as high as Haman!
That s better, said Miss Howard more enthusiastically.
But I must ask you to trust me. Now your help may be very valuable to
me. I will tell you why. Because, in all this house of mourning, yours
are the only eyes that have wept.
Miss Howard blinked, and a new note crept into the gruffness of her
voice.
If you mean that I was fond of her yes, I was. You know, Emily was a
selfish old woman in her way. She was very generous, but she always
wanted a return. She never let people forget what she had done for
them and, that way she missed love. Don t think she ever realized it,
though, or felt the lack of it. Hope not, anyway. I was on a different
footing. I took my stand from the first. So many pounds a year I m
worth to you. Well and good. But not a penny piece besides not a pair
of gloves, nor a theatre ticket. She didn t understand was very
offended sometimes. Said I was foolishly proud. It wasn t that but I
couldn t explain. Anyway, I kept my self respect. And so, out of the
whole bunch, I was the only one who could allow myself to be fond of
her. I watched over her. I guarded her from the lot of them, and then a
glib tongued scoundrel comes along, and pooh! all my years of devotion
go for nothing.
Poirot nodded sympathetically.
I understand, mademoiselle, I understand all you feel. It is most
natural. You think that we are lukewarm that we lack fire and
energy but trust me, it is not so.
John stuck his head in at this juncture, and invited us both to come up
to Mrs. Inglethorp s room, as he and Mr. Wells had finished looking
through the desk in the boudoir.
As we went up the stairs, John looked back to the dining room door, and
lowered his voice confidentially:
Look here, what s going to happen when these two meet?
I shook my head helplessly.
I ve told Mary to keep them apart if she can.
Will she be able to do so?
The Lord only knows. There s one thing, Inglethorp himself won t be
too keen on meeting her.
You ve got the keys still, haven t you, Poirot? I asked, as we
reached the door of the locked room.
Taking the keys from Poirot, John unlocked it, and we all passed in.
The lawyer went straight to the desk, and John followed him.
My mother kept most of her important papers in this despatch case, I
believe, he said.
Poirot drew out the small bunch of keys.
Permit me. I locked it, out of precaution, this morning.
But it s not locked now.
Impossible!
See. And John lifted the lid as he spoke.
Milles tonnerres! cried Poirot, dumbfounded. And I who have both
the keys in my pocket! He flung himself upon the case. Suddenly he
stiffened. Eh voil une affaire! This lock has been forced.
What?
Poirot laid down the case again.
But who forced it? Why should they? When? But the door was locked?
These exclamations burst from us disjointedly.
Poirot answered them categorically almost mechanically.
Who? That is the question. Why? Ah, if I only knew. When? Since I was
here an hour ago. As to the door being locked, it is a very ordinary
lock. Probably any other of the doorkeys in this passage would fit it.
We stared at one another blankly. Poirot had walked over to the
mantelpiece. He was outwardly calm, but I noticed his hands, which from
long force of habit were mechanically straightening the spill vases on
the mantelpiece, were shaking violently.
See here, it was like this, he said at last. There was something in
that case some piece of evidence, slight in itself perhaps, but still
enough of a clue to connect the murderer with the crime. It was vital
to him that it should be destroyed before it was discovered and its
significance appreciated. Therefore, he took the risk, the great risk,
of coming in here. Finding the case locked, he was obliged to force it,
thus betraying his presence. For him to take that risk, it must have
been something of great importance.
But what was it?
Ah! cried Poirot, with a gesture of anger. That, I do not know! A
document of some kind, without doubt, possibly the scrap of paper
Dorcas saw in her hand yesterday afternoon. And I his anger burst
forth freely miserable animal that I am! I guessed nothing! I have
behaved like an imbecile! I should never have left that case here. I
should have carried it away with me. Ah, triple pig! And now it is
gone. It is destroyed but is it destroyed? Is there not yet a chance we
must leave no stone unturned
He rushed like a madman from the room, and I followed him as soon as I
had sufficiently recovered my wits. But, by the time I had reached the
top of the stairs, he was out of sight.
Mary Cavendish was standing where the staircase branched, staring down
into the hall in the direction in which he had disappeared.
What has happened to your extraordinary little friend, Mr. Hastings?
He has just rushed past me like a mad bull.
He s rather upset about something, I remarked feebly. I really did
not know how much Poirot would wish me to disclose. As I saw a faint
smile gather on Mrs. Cavendish s expressive mouth, I endeavoured to try
and turn the conversation by saying: They haven t met yet, have they?
Who?
Mr. Inglethorp and Miss Howard.
She looked at me in rather a disconcerting manner.
Do you think it would be such a disaster if they did meet?
Well, don t you? I said, rather taken aback.
No. She was smiling in her quiet way. I should like to see a good
flare up. It would clear the air. At present we are all thinking so
much, and saying so little.
John doesn t think so, I remarked. He s anxious to keep them apart.
Oh, John!
Something in her tone fired me, and I blurted out:
Old John s an awfully good sort.
She studied me curiously for a minute or two, and then said, to my
great surprise:
You are loyal to your friend. I like you for that.
Aren t you my friend too?
I am a very bad friend.
Why do you say that?
Because it is true. I am charming to my friends one day, and forget
all about them the next.
I don t know what impelled me, but I was nettled, and I said foolishly
and not in the best of taste:
Yet you seem to be invariably charming to Dr. Bauerstein!
Instantly I regretted my words. Her face stiffened. I had the
impression of a steel curtain coming down and blotting out the real
woman. Without a word, she turned and went swiftly up the stairs,
whilst I stood like an idiot gaping after her.
I was recalled to other matters by a frightful row going on below. I
could hear Poirot shouting and expounding. I was vexed to think that my
diplomacy had been in vain. The little man appeared to be taking the
whole house into his confidence, a proceeding of which I, for one,
doubted the wisdom. Once again I could not help regretting that my
friend was so prone to lose his head in moments of excitement. I
stepped briskly down the stairs. The sight of me calmed Poirot almost
immediately. I drew him aside.
My dear fellow, I said, is this wise? Surely you don t want the
whole house to know of this occurrence? You are actually playing into
the criminal s hands.
You think so, Hastings?
I am sure of it.
Well, well, my friend, I will be guided by you.
Good. Although, unfortunately, it is a little too late now.
Sure.
He looked so crestfallen and abashed that I felt quite sorry, though I
still thought my rebuke a just and wise one.
Well, he said at last, let us go, mon ami .
You have finished here?
For the moment, yes. You will walk back with me to the village?
Willingly.
He picked up his little suit case, and we went out through the open
window in the drawing room. Cynthia Murdoch was just coming in, and
Poirot stood aside to let her pass.
Excuse me, mademoiselle, one minute.
Yes? she turned inquiringly.
Did you ever make up Mrs. Inglethorp s medicines?
A slight flush rose in her face, as she answered rather constrainedly:
No.
Only her powders?
The flush deepened as Cynthia replied:
Oh, yes, I did make up some sleeping powders for her once.
These?
Poirot produced the empty box which had contained powders.
She nodded.
Can you tell me what they were? Sulphonal? Veronal?
No, they were bromide powders.
Ah! Thank you, mademoiselle; good morning.
As we walked briskly away from the house, I glanced at him more than
once. I had often before noticed that, if anything excited him, his
eyes turned green like a cat s. They were shining like emeralds now.
My friend, he broke out at last, I have a little idea, a very
strange, and probably utterly impossible idea. And yet it fits in.
I shrugged my shoulders. I privately thought that Poirot was rather too
much given to these fantastic ideas. In this case, surely, the truth
was only too plain and apparent.
So that is the explanation of the blank label on the box, I remarked.
Very simple, as you said. I really wonder that I did not think of it
myself.
Poirot did not appear to be listening to me.
They have made one more discovery, l bas , he observed, jerking his
thumb over his shoulder in the direction of Styles. Mr. Wells told me
as we were going upstairs.
What was it?
Locked up in the desk in the boudoir, they found a will of Mrs.
Inglethorp s, dated before her marriage, leaving her fortune to Alfred
Inglethorp. It must have been made just at the time they were engaged.
It came quite as a surprise to Wells and to John Cavendish also. It was
written on one of those printed will forms, and witnessed by two of the
servants not Dorcas.
Did Mr. Inglethorp know of it?
He says not.
One might take that with a grain of salt, I remarked sceptically.
All these wills are very confusing. Tell me, how did those scribbled
words on the envelope help you to discover that a will was made
yesterday afternoon?
Poirot smiled.
Mon ami , have you ever, when writing a letter, been arrested by the
fact that you did not know how to spell a certain word?
Yes, often. I suppose everyone has.
Exactly. And have you not, in such a case, tried the word once or
twice on the edge of the blotting paper, or a spare scrap of paper, to
see if it looked right? Well, that is what Mrs. Inglethorp did. You
will notice that the word possessed is spelt first with one s and
subsequently with two correctly. To make sure, she had further tried it
in a sentence, thus: I am possessed. Now, what did that tell me? It
told me that Mrs. Inglethorp had been writing the word possessed that
afternoon, and, having the fragment of paper found in the grate fresh
in my mind, the possibility of a will a document almost certain to
contain that word occurred to me at once. This possibility was
confirmed by a further circumstance. In the general confusion, the
boudoir had not been swept that morning, and near the desk were several
traces of brown mould and earth. The weather had been perfectly fine
for some days, and no ordinary boots would have left such a heavy
deposit.
I strolled to the window, and saw at once that the begonia beds had
been newly planted. The mould in the beds was exactly similar to that
on the floor of the boudoir, and also I learnt from you that they had
been planted yesterday afternoon. I was now sure that one, or possibly
both of the gardeners for there were two sets of footprints in the
bed had entered the boudoir, for if Mrs. Inglethorp had merely wished
to speak to them she would in all probability have stood at the window,
and they would not have come into the room at all. I was now quite
convinced that she had made a fresh will, and had called the two
gardeners in to witness her signature. Events proved that I was right
in my supposition.
That was very ingenious, I could not help admitting. I must confess
that the conclusions I drew from those few scribbled words were quite
erroneous.
He smiled.
You gave too much rein to your imagination. Imagination is a good
servant, and a bad master. The simplest explanation is always the most
likely.
Another point how did you know that the key of the despatch case had
been lost?
I did not know it. It was a guess that turned out to be correct. You
observed that it had a piece of twisted wire through the handle. That
suggested to me at once that it had possibly been wrenched off a flimsy
key ring. Now, if it had been lost and recovered, Mrs. Inglethorp would
at once have replaced it on her bunch; but on her bunch I found what
was obviously the duplicate key, very new and bright, which led me to
the hypothesis that somebody else had inserted the original key in the
lock of the despatch case.
Yes, I said, Alfred Inglethorp, without doubt.
Poirot looked at me curiously.
You are very sure of his guilt?
Well, naturally. Every fresh circumstance seems to establish it more
clearly.
On the contrary, said Poirot quietly, there are several points in
his favour.
Oh, come now!
Yes.
I see only one.
And that?
That he was not in the house last night.
Bad shot! as you English say! You have chosen the one point that to
my mind tells against him.
How is that?
Because if Mr. Inglethorp knew that his wife would be poisoned last
night, he would certainly have arranged to be away from the house. His
excuse was an obviously trumped up one. That leaves us two
possibilities: either he knew what was going to happen or he had a
reason of his own for his absence.
And that reason? I asked sceptically.
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
How should I know? Discreditable, without doubt. This Mr. Inglethorp,
I should say, is somewhat of a scoundrel but that does not of necessity
make him a murderer.
I shook my head, unconvinced.
We do not agree, eh? said Poirot. Well, let us leave it. Time will
show which of us is right. Now let us turn to other aspects of the
case. What do you make of the fact that all the doors of the bedroom
were bolted on the inside?
Well I considered. One must look at it logically.
True.
I should put it this way. The doors were bolted our own eyes have
told us that yet the presence of the candle grease on the floor, and
the destruction of the will, prove that during the night someone
entered the room. You agree so far?
Perfectly. Put with admirable clearness. Proceed.
Well, I said, encouraged, as the person who entered did not do so by
the window, nor by miraculous means, it follows that the door must have
been opened from inside by Mrs. Inglethorp herself. That strengthens
the conviction that the person in question was her husband. She would
naturally open the door to her own husband.
Poirot shook his head.
Why should she? She had bolted the door leading into his room a most
unusual proceeding on her part she had had a most violent quarrel with
him that very afternoon. No, he was the last person she would admit.
But you agree with me that the door must have been opened by Mrs.
Inglethorp herself?
There is another possibility. She may have forgotten to bolt the door
into the passage when she went to bed, and have got up later, towards
morning, and bolted it then.
Poirot, is that seriously your opinion?
No, I do not say it is so, but it might be. Now, to turn to another
feature, what do you make of the scrap of conversation you overheard
between Mrs. Cavendish and her mother in law?
I had forgotten that, I said thoughtfully. That is as enigmatical as
ever. It seems incredible that a woman like Mrs. Cavendish, proud and
reticent to the last degree, should interfere so violently in what was
certainly not her affair.
Precisely. It was an astonishing thing for a woman of her breeding to
do.
It is certainly curious, I agreed. Still, it is unimportant, and
need not be taken into account.
A groan burst from Poirot.
What have I always told you? Everything must be taken into account. If
the fact will not fit the theory let the theory go.
Well, we shall see, I said, nettled.
Yes, we shall see.
We had reached Leastways Cottage, and Poirot ushered me upstairs to his
own room. He offered me one of the tiny Russian cigarettes he himself
occasionally smoked. I was amused to notice that he stowed away the
used matches most carefully in a little china pot. My momentary
annoyance vanished.
Poirot had placed our two chairs in front of the open window which
commanded a view of the village street. The fresh air blew in warm and
pleasant. It was going to be a hot day.
Suddenly my attention was arrested by a weedy looking young man rushing
down the street at a great pace. It was the expression on his face that
was extraordinary a curious mingling of terror and agitation.
Look, Poirot! I said.
He leant forward.
Tiens! he said. It is Mr. Mace, from the chemist s shop. He is
coming here.
The young man came to a halt before Leastways Cottage, and, after
hesitating a moment, pounded vigorously at the door.
A little minute, cried Poirot from the window. I come.
Motioning to me to follow him, he ran swiftly down the stairs and
opened the door. Mr. Mace began at once.
Oh, Mr. Poirot, I m sorry for the inconvenience, but I heard that
you d just come back from the Hall?
Yes, we have.
The young man moistened his dry lips. His face was working curiously.
It s all over the village about old Mrs. Inglethorp dying so suddenly.
They do say he lowered his voice cautiously that it s poison?
Poirot s face remained quite impassive.
Only the doctors can tell us that, Mr. Mace.
Yes, exactly of course The young man hesitated, and then his
agitation was too much for him. He clutched Poirot by the arm, and sank
his voice to a whisper: Just tell me this, Mr. Poirot, it isn t it
isn t strychnine, is it?
I hardly heard what Poirot replied. Something evidently of a
non committal nature. The young man departed, and as he closed the door
Poirot s eyes met mine.
Yes, he said, nodding gravely. He will have evidence to give at the
inquest.
We went slowly upstairs again. I was opening my lips, when Poirot
stopped me with a gesture of his hand.
Not now, not now, mon ami . I have need of reflection. My mind is in
some disorder which is not well.
For about ten minutes he sat in dead silence, perfectly still, except
for several expressive motions of his eyebrows, and all the time his
eyes grew steadily greener. At last he heaved a deep sigh.
It is well. The bad moment has passed. Now all is arranged and
classified. One must never permit confusion. The case is not clear
yet no. For it is of the most complicated! It puzzles me . Me ,
Hercule Poirot! There are two facts of significance.
And what are they?
The first is the state of the weather yesterday. That is very
important.
But it was a glorious day! I interrupted. Poirot, you re pulling my
leg!
Not at all. The thermometer registered 80 degrees in the shade. Do not
forget that, my friend. It is the key to the whole riddle!
And the second point? I asked.
The important fact that Monsieur Inglethorp wears very peculiar
clothes, has a black beard, and uses glasses.
Poirot, I cannot believe you are serious.
I am absolutely serious, my friend.
But this is childish!
No, it is very momentous.
And supposing the Coroner s jury returns a verdict of Wilful Murder
against Alfred Inglethorp. What becomes of your theories, then?
They would not be shaken because twelve stupid men had happened to
make a mistake! But that will not occur. For one thing, a country jury
is not anxious to take responsibility upon itself, and Mr. Inglethorp
stands practically in the position of local squire. Also, he added
placidly, I should not allow it!
You would not allow it?
No.
I looked at the extraordinary little man, divided between annoyance and
amusement. He was so tremendously sure of himself. As though he read my
thoughts, he nodded gently.
Oh, yes, mon ami , I would do what I say. He got up and laid his
hand on my shoulder. His physiognomy underwent a complete change. Tears
came into his eyes. In all this, you see, I think of that poor Mrs.
Inglethorp who is dead. She was not extravagantly loved no. But she was
very good to us Belgians I owe her a debt.
I endeavoured to interrupt, but Poirot swept on.
Let me tell you this, Hastings. She would never forgive me if I let
Alfred Inglethorp, her husband, be arrested now when a word from me
could save him!
CHAPTER VI. THE INQUEST
In the interval before the inquest, Poirot was unfailing in his
activity. Twice he was closeted with Mr. Wells. He also took long walks
into the country. I rather resented his not taking me into his
confidence, the more so as I could not in the least guess what he was
driving at.
It occurred to me that he might have been making inquiries at Raikes s
farm; so, finding him out when I called at Leastways Cottage on
Wednesday evening, I walked over there by the fields, hoping to meet
him. But there was no sign of him, and I hesitated to go right up to
the farm itself. As I walked away, I met an aged rustic, who leered at
me cunningly.
You m from the Hall, bain t you? he asked.
Yes. I m looking for a friend of mine whom I thought might have walked
this way.
A little chap? As waves his hands when he talks? One of them Belgies
from the village?
Yes, I said eagerly. He has been here, then?
Oh, ay, he s been here, right enough. More n once too. Friend of
yours, is he? Ah, you gentlemen from the Hall you m a pretty lot! And
he leered more jocosely than ever.
Why, do the gentlemen from the Hall come here often? I asked, as
carelessly as I could.
He winked at me knowingly.
One does, mister. Naming no names, mind. And a very liberal
gentleman too! Oh, thank you, sir, I m sure.
I walked on sharply. Evelyn Howard had been right then, and I
experienced a sharp twinge of disgust, as I thought of Alfred
Inglethorp s liberality with another woman s money. Had that piquant
gipsy face been at the bottom of the crime, or was it the baser
mainspring of money? Probably a judicious mixture of both.
On one point, Poirot seemed to have a curious obsession. He once or
twice observed to me that he thought Dorcas must have made an error in
fixing the time of the quarrel. He suggested to her repeatedly that it
was four thirty, and not four o clock when she had heard the voices.
But Dorcas was unshaken. Quite an hour, or even more, had elapsed
between the time when she had heard the voices and five o clock, when
she had taken tea to her mistress.
The inquest was held on Friday at the Stylites Arms in the village.
Poirot and I sat together, not being required to give evidence.
The preliminaries were gone through. The jury viewed the body, and John
Cavendish gave evidence of identification.
Further questioned, he described his awakening in the early hours of
the morning, and the circumstances of his mother s death.
The medical evidence was next taken. There was a breathless hush, and
every eye was fixed on the famous London specialist, who was known to
be one of the greatest authorities of the day on the subject of
toxicology.
In a few brief words, he summed up the result of the post mortem. Shorn
of its medical phraseology and technicalities, it amounted to the fact
that Mrs. Inglethorp had met her death as the result of strychnine
poisoning. Judging from the quantity recovered, she must have taken not
less than three quarters of a grain of strychnine, but probably one
grain or slightly over.
Is it possible that she could have swallowed the poison by accident?
asked the Coroner.
I should consider it very unlikely. Strychnine is not used for
domestic purposes, as some poisons are, and there are restrictions
placed on its sale.
Does anything in your examination lead you to determine how the poison
was administered?
No.
You arrived at Styles before Dr. Wilkins, I believe?
That is so. The motor met me just outside the lodge gates, and I
hurried there as fast as I could.
Will you relate to us exactly what happened next?
I entered Mrs. Inglethorp s room. She was at that moment in a typical
tetanic convulsion. She turned towards me, and gasped out:
Alfred Alfred
Could the strychnine have been administered in Mrs. Inglethorp s
after dinner coffee which was taken to her by her husband?
Possibly, but strychnine is a fairly rapid drug in its action. The
symptoms appear from one to two hours after it has been swallowed. It
is retarded under certain conditions, none of which, however, appear to
have been present in this case. I presume Mrs. Inglethorp took the
coffee after dinner about eight o clock, whereas the symptoms did not
manifest themselves until the early hours of the morning, which, on the
face of it, points to the drug having been taken much later in the
evening.
Mrs. Inglethorp was in the habit of drinking a cup of cocoa in the
middle of the night. Could the strychnine have been administered in
that?
No, I myself took a sample of the cocoa remaining in the saucepan and
had it analysed. There was no strychnine present.
I heard Poirot chuckle softly beside me.
How did you know? I whispered.
Listen.
I should say the doctor was continuing that I would have been
considerably surprised at any other result.
Why?
Simply because strychnine has an unusually bitter taste. It can be
detected in a solution of one in seventy thousand, and can only be
disguised by some strongly flavoured substance. Cocoa would be quite
powerless to mask it.
One of the jury wanted to know if the same objection applied to coffee.
No. Coffee has a bitter taste of its own which would probably cover
the taste of strychnine.
Then you consider it more likely that the drug was administered in the
coffee, but that for some unknown reason its action was delayed.
Yes, but, the cup being completely smashed, there is no possibility of
analyzing its contents.
This concluded Dr. Bauerstein s evidence. Dr. Wilkins corroborated it
on all points. Sounded as to the possibility of suicide, he repudiated
it utterly. The deceased, he said, suffered from a weak heart, but
otherwise enjoyed perfect health, and was of a cheerful and
well balanced disposition. She would be one of the last people to take
her own life.
Lawrence Cavendish was next called. His evidence was quite unimportant,
being a mere repetition of that of his brother. Just as he was about to
step down, he paused, and said rather hesitatingly:
I should like to make a suggestion if I may?
He glanced deprecatingly at the Coroner, who replied briskly:
Certainly, Mr. Cavendish, we are here to arrive at the truth of this
matter, and welcome anything that may lead to further elucidation.
It is just an idea of mine, explained Lawrence. Of course I may be
quite wrong, but it still seems to me that my mother s death might be
accounted for by natural means.
How do you make that out, Mr. Cavendish?
My mother, at the time of her death, and for some time before it, was
taking a tonic containing strychnine.
Ah! said the Coroner.
The jury looked up, interested.
I believe, continued Lawrence, that there have been cases where the
cumulative effect of a drug, administered for some time, has ended by
causing death. Also, is it not possible that she may have taken an
overdose of her medicine by accident?
This is the first we have heard of the deceased taking strychnine at
the time of her death. We are much obliged to you, Mr. Cavendish.
Dr. Wilkins was recalled and ridiculed the idea.
What Mr. Cavendish suggests is quite impossible. Any doctor would tell
you the same. Strychnine is, in a certain sense, a cumulative poison,
but it would be quite impossible for it to result in sudden death in
this way. There would have to be a long period of chronic symptoms
which would at once have attracted my attention. The whole thing is
absurd.
And the second suggestion? That Mrs. Inglethorp may have inadvertently
taken an overdose?
Three, or even four doses, would not have resulted in death. Mrs.
Inglethorp always had an extra large amount of medicine made up at a
time, as she dealt with Coot s, the Cash Chemists in Tadminster. She
would have had to take very nearly the whole bottle to account for the
amount of strychnine found at the post mortem.
Then you consider that we may dismiss the tonic as not being in any
way instrumental in causing her death?
Certainly. The supposition is ridiculous.
The same juryman who had interrupted before here suggested that the
chemist who made up the medicine might have committed an error.
That, of course, is always possible, replied the doctor.
But Dorcas, who was the next witness called, dispelled even that
possibility. The medicine had not been newly made up. On the contrary,
Mrs. Inglethorp had taken the last dose on the day of her death.
So the question of the tonic was finally abandoned, and the Coroner
proceeded with his task. Having elicited from Dorcas how she had been
awakened by the violent ringing of her mistress s bell, and had
subsequently roused the household, he passed to the subject of the
quarrel on the preceding afternoon.
Dorcas s evidence on this point was substantially what Poirot and I had
already heard, so I will not repeat it here.
The next witness was Mary Cavendish. She stood very upright, and spoke
in a low, clear, and perfectly composed voice. In answer to the
Coroner s question, she told how, her alarm clock having aroused her at
four thirty as usual, she was dressing, when she was startled by the
sound of something heavy falling.
That would have been the table by the bed? commented the Coroner.
I opened my door, continued Mary, and listened. In a few minutes a
bell rang violently. Dorcas came running down and woke my husband, and
we all went to my mother in law s room, but it was locked
The Coroner interrupted her.
I really do not think we need trouble you further on that point. We
know all that can be known of the subsequent happenings. But I should
be obliged if you would tell us all you overheard of the quarrel the
day before.
I?
There was a faint insolence in her voice. She raised her hand and
adjusted the ruffle of lace at her neck, turning her head a little as
she did so. And quite spontaneously the thought flashed across my mind:
She is gaining time!
Yes. I understand, continued the Coroner deliberately, that you were
sitting reading on the bench just outside the long window of the
boudoir. That is so, is it not?
This was news to me and glancing sideways at Poirot, I fancied that it
was news to him as well.
There was the faintest pause, the mere hesitation of a moment, before
she answered:
Yes, that is so.
And the boudoir window was open, was it not?
Surely her face grew a little paler as she answered:
Yes.
Then you cannot have failed to hear the voices inside, especially as
they were raised in anger. In fact, they would be more audible where
you were than in the hall.
Possibly.
Will you repeat to us what you overheard of the quarrel?
I really do not remember hearing anything.
Do you mean to say you did not hear voices?
Oh, yes, I heard the voices, but I did not hear what they said. A
faint spot of colour came into her cheek. I am not in the habit of
listening to private conversations.
The Coroner persisted.
And you remember nothing at all? Nothing , Mrs. Cavendish? Not one
stray word or phrase to make you realize that it was a private
conversation?
She paused, and seemed to reflect, still outwardly as calm as ever.
Yes; I remember. Mrs. Inglethorp said something I do not remember
exactly what about causing scandal between husband and wife.
Ah! the Coroner leant back satisfied. That corresponds with what
Dorcas heard. But excuse me, Mrs. Cavendish, although you realized it
was a private conversation, you did not move away? You remained where
you were?
I caught the momentary gleam of her tawny eyes as she raised them. I
felt certain that at that moment she would willingly have torn the
little lawyer, with his insinuations, into pieces, but she replied
quietly enough:
No. I was very comfortable where I was. I fixed my mind on my book.
And that is all you can tell us?
That is all.
The examination was over, though I doubted if the Coroner was entirely
satisfied with it. I think he suspected that Mary Cavendish could tell
more if she chose.
Amy Hill, shop assistant, was next called, and deposed to having sold a
will form on the afternoon of the 17th to William Earl, under gardener
at Styles.
William Earl and Manning succeeded her, and testified to witnessing a
document. Manning fixed the time at about four thirty, William was of
the opinion that it was rather earlier.
Cynthia Murdoch came next. She had, however, little to tell. She had
known nothing of the tragedy, until awakened by Mrs. Cavendish.
You did not hear the table fall?
No. I was fast asleep.
The Coroner smiled.
A good conscience makes a sound sleeper, he observed. Thank you,
Miss Murdoch, that is all.
Miss Howard.
Miss Howard produced the letter written to her by Mrs. Inglethorp on
the evening of the 17th. Poirot and I had, of course already seen it.
It added nothing to our knowledge of the tragedy. The following is a
facsimile:
STYLES COURT
ESSEX
hand written note:
July 17th
My dear Evelyn
Can we not bury
the hachet? I have
found it hard to forgive
the things you said
against my dear husband
but I am an old woman
very fond of you
Yours affectionately,
Emily Inglethorpe
It was handed to the jury who scrutinized it attentively.
I fear it does not help us much, said the Coroner, with a sigh.
There is no mention of any of the events of that afternoon.
Plain as a pikestaff to me, said Miss Howard shortly. It shows
clearly enough that my poor old friend had just found out she d been
made a fool of!
It says nothing of the kind in the letter, the Coroner pointed out.
No, because Emily never could bear to put herself in the wrong. But
I know her. She wanted me back. But she wasn t going to own that I d
been right. She went round about. Most people do. Don t believe in it
myself.
Mr. Wells smiled faintly. So, I noticed, did several of the jury. Miss
Howard was obviously quite a public character.
Anyway, all this tomfoolery is a great waste of time, continued the
lady, glancing up and down the jury disparagingly. Talk talk talk!
When all the time we know perfectly well
The Coroner interrupted her in an agony of apprehension:
Thank you, Miss Howard, that is all.
I fancy he breathed a sigh of relief when she complied.
Then came the sensation of the day. The Coroner called Albert Mace,
chemist s assistant.
It was our agitated young man of the pale face. In answer to the
Coroner s questions, he explained that he was a qualified pharmacist,
but had only recently come to this particular shop, as the assistant
formerly there had just been called up for the army.
These preliminaries completed, the Coroner proceeded to business.
Mr. Mace, have you lately sold strychnine to any unauthorized person?
Yes, sir.
When was this?
Last Monday night.
Monday? Not Tuesday?
No, sir, Monday, the 16th.
Will you tell us to whom you sold it?
You could have heard a pin drop.
Yes, sir. It was to Mr. Inglethorp.
Every eye turned simultaneously to where Alfred Inglethorp was sitting,
impassive and wooden. He started slightly, as the damning words fell
from the young man s lips. I half thought he was going to rise from his
chair, but he remained seated, although a remarkably well acted
expression of astonishment rose on his face.
You are sure of what you say? asked the Coroner sternly.
Quite sure, sir.
Are you in the habit of selling strychnine indiscriminately over the
counter?
The wretched young man wilted visibly under the Coroner s frown.
Oh, no, sir of course not. But, seeing it was Mr. Inglethorp of the
Hall, I thought there was no harm in it. He said it was to poison a
dog.
Inwardly I sympathized. It was only human nature to endeavour to please
The Hall especially when it might result in custom being transferred
from Coot s to the local establishment.
Is it not customary for anyone purchasing poison to sign a book?
Yes, sir, Mr. Inglethorp did so.
Have you got the book here?
Yes, sir.
It was produced; and, with a few words of stern censure, the Coroner
dismissed the wretched Mr. Mace.
Then, amidst a breathless silence, Alfred Inglethorp was called. Did he
realize, I wondered, how closely the halter was being drawn around his
neck?
The Coroner went straight to the point.
On Monday evening last, did you purchase strychnine for the purpose of
poisoning a dog?
Inglethorp replied with perfect calmness:
No, I did not. There is no dog at Styles, except an outdoor sheepdog,
which is in perfect health.
You deny absolutely having purchased strychnine from Albert Mace on
Monday last?
I do.
Do you also deny this ?
The Coroner handed him the register in which his signature was
inscribed.
Certainly I do. The hand writing is quite different from mine. I will
show you.
He took an old envelope out of his pocket, and wrote his name on it,
handing it to the jury. It was certainly utterly dissimilar.
Then what is your explanation of Mr. Mace s statement?
Alfred Inglethorp replied imperturbably:
Mr. Mace must have been mistaken.
The Coroner hesitated for a moment, and then said:
Mr. Inglethorp, as a mere matter of form, would you mind telling us
where you were on the evening of Monday, July 16th?
Really I cannot remember.
That is absurd, Mr. Inglethorp, said the Coroner sharply. Think
again.
Inglethorp shook his head.
I cannot tell you. I have an idea that I was out walking.
In what direction?
I really can t remember.
The Coroner s face grew graver.
Were you in company with anyone?
No.
Did you meet anyone on your walk?
No.
That is a pity, said the Coroner dryly. I am to take it then that
you decline to say where you were at the time that Mr. Mace positively
recognized you as entering the shop to purchase strychnine?
If you like to take it that way, yes.
Be careful, Mr. Inglethorp.
Poirot was fidgeting nervously.
Sacr ! he murmured. Does this imbecile of a man want to be
arrested?
Inglethorp was indeed creating a bad impression. His futile denials
would not have convinced a child. The Coroner, however, passed briskly
to the next point, and Poirot drew a deep breath of relief.
You had a discussion with your wife on Tuesday afternoon?
Pardon me, interrupted Alfred Inglethorp, you have been misinformed.
I had no quarrel with my dear wife. The whole story is absolutely
untrue. I was absent from the house the entire afternoon.
Have you anyone who can testify to that?
You have my word, said Inglethorp haughtily.
The Coroner did not trouble to reply.
There are two witnesses who will swear to having heard your
disagreement with Mrs. Inglethorp.
Those witnesses were mistaken.
I was puzzled. The man spoke with such quiet assurance that I was
staggered. I looked at Poirot. There was an expression of exultation on
his face which I could not understand. Was he at last convinced of
Alfred Inglethorp s guilt?
Mr. Inglethorp, said the Coroner, you have heard your wife s dying
words repeated here. Can you explain them in any way?
Certainly I can.
You can?
It seems to me very simple. The room was dimly lighted. Dr. Bauerstein
is much of my height and build, and, like me, wears a beard. In the dim
light, and suffering as she was, my poor wife mistook him for me.
Ah! murmured Poirot to himself. But it is an idea, that!
You think it is true? I whispered.
I do not say that. But it is truly an ingenious supposition.
You read my wife s last words as an accusation Inglethorp was
continuing they were, on the contrary, an appeal to me.
The Coroner reflected a moment, then he said:
I believe, Mr. Inglethorp, that you yourself poured out the coffee,
and took it to your wife that evening?
I poured it out, yes. But I did not take it to her. I meant to do so,
but I was told that a friend was at the hall door, so I laid down the
coffee on the hall table. When I came through the hall again a few
minutes later, it was gone.
This statement might, or might not, be true, but it did not seem to me
to improve matters much for Inglethorp. In any case, he had had ample
time to introduce the poison.
At that point, Poirot nudged me gently, indicating two men who were
sitting together near the door. One was a little, sharp, dark,
ferret faced man, the other was tall and fair.
I questioned Poirot mutely. He put his lips to my ear.
Do you know who that little man is?
I shook my head.
That is Detective Inspector James Japp of Scotland Yard Jimmy Japp.
The other man is from Scotland Yard too. Things are moving quickly, my
friend.
I stared at the two men intently. There was certainly nothing of the
policeman about them. I should never have suspected them of being
official personages.
I was still staring, when I was startled and recalled by the verdict
being given:
Wilful Murder against some person or persons unknown.
CHAPTER VII. POIROT PAYS HIS DEBTS
As we came out of the Stylites Arms, Poirot drew me aside by a gentle
pressure of the arm. I understood his object. He was waiting for the
Scotland Yard men.
In a few moments, they emerged, and Poirot at once stepped forward, and
accosted the shorter of the two.
I fear you do not remember me, Inspector Japp.
Why, if it isn t Mr. Poirot! cried the Inspector. He turned to the
other man. You ve heard me speak of Mr. Poirot? It was in 1904 he and
I worked together the Abercrombie forgery case you remember, he was run
down in Brussels. Ah, those were great days, moosier. Then, do you
remember Baron Altara? There was a pretty rogue for you! He eluded
the clutches of half the police in Europe. But we nailed him in
Antwerp thanks to Mr. Poirot here.
As these friendly reminiscences were being indulged in, I drew nearer,
and was introduced to Detective Inspector Japp, who, in his turn,
introduced us both to his companion, Superintendent Summerhaye.
I need hardly ask what you are doing here, gentlemen, remarked
Poirot.
Japp closed one eye knowingly.
No, indeed. Pretty clear case I should say.
But Poirot answered gravely:
There I differ from you.
Oh, come! said Summerhaye, opening his lips for the first time.
Surely the whole thing is clear as daylight. The man s caught
red handed. How he could be such a fool beats me!
But Japp was looking attentively at Poirot.
Hold your fire, Summerhaye, he remarked jocularly. Me and Moosier
here have met before and there s no man s judgment I d sooner take than
his. If I m not greatly mistaken, he s got something up his sleeve.
Isn t that so, moosier?
Poirot smiled.
I have drawn certain conclusions yes.
Summerhaye was still looking rather sceptical, but Japp continued his
scrutiny of Poirot.
It s this way, he said, so far, we ve only seen the case from the
outside. That s where the Yard s at a disadvantage in a case of this
kind, where the murder s only out, so to speak, after the inquest. A
lot depends on being on the spot first thing, and that s where Mr.
Poirot s had the start of us. We shouldn t have been here as soon as
this even, if it hadn t been for the fact that there was a smart doctor
on the spot, who gave us the tip through the Coroner. But you ve been
on the spot from the first, and you may have picked up some little
hints. From the evidence at the inquest, Mr. Inglethorp murdered his
wife as sure as I stand here, and if anyone but you hinted the contrary
I d laugh in his face. I must say I was surprised the jury didn t bring
it in Wilful Murder against him right off. I think they would have, if
it hadn t been for the Coroner he seemed to be holding them back.
Perhaps, though, you have a warrant for his arrest in your pocket
now, suggested Poirot.
A kind of wooden shutter of officialdom came down from Japp s
expressive countenance.
Perhaps I have, and perhaps I haven t, he remarked dryly.
Poirot looked at him thoughtfully.
I am very anxious, Messieurs, that he should not be arrested.
I dare say, observed Summerhaye sarcastically.
Japp was regarding Poirot with comical perplexity.
Can t you go a little further, Mr. Poirot? A wink s as good as a
nod from you. You ve been on the spot and the Yard doesn t want to make
any mistakes, you know.
Poirot nodded gravely.
That is exactly what I thought. Well, I will tell you this. Use your
warrant: Arrest Mr. Inglethorp. But it will bring you no kudos the case
against him will be dismissed at once! Comme a! And he snapped his
fingers expressively.
Japp s face grew grave, though Summerhaye gave an incredulous snort.
As for me, I was literally dumb with astonishment. I could only
conclude that Poirot was mad.
Japp had taken out a handkerchief, and was gently dabbing his brow.
I daren t do it, Mr. Poirot. I d take your word, but there s others
over me who ll be asking what the devil I mean by it. Can t you give me
a little more to go on?
Poirot reflected a moment.
It can be done, he said at last. I admit I do not wish it. It forces
my hand. I would have preferred to work in the dark just for the
present, but what you say is very just the word of a Belgian policeman,
whose day is past, is not enough! And Alfred Inglethorp must not be
arrested. That I have sworn, as my friend Hastings here knows. See,
then, my good Japp, you go at once to Styles?
Well, in about half an hour. We re seeing the Coroner and the doctor
first.
Good. Call for me in passing the last house in the village. I will go
with you. At Styles, Mr. Inglethorp will give you, or if he refuses as
is probable I will give you such proofs that shall satisfy you that the
case against him could not possibly be sustained. Is that a bargain?
That s a bargain, said Japp heartily. And, on behalf of the Yard,
I m much obliged to you, though I m bound to confess I can t at present
see the faintest possible loop hole in the evidence, but you always
were a marvel! So long, then, moosier.
The two detectives strode away, Summerhaye with an incredulous grin on
his face.
Well, my friend, cried Poirot, before I could get in a word, what do
you think? Mon Dieu! I had some warm moments in that court; I did not
figure to myself that the man would be so pig headed as to refuse to
say anything at all. Decidedly, it was the policy of an imbecile.
H m! There are other explanations besides that of imbecility, I
remarked. For, if the case against him is true, how could he defend
himself except by silence?
Why, in a thousand ingenious ways, cried Poirot. See; say that it is
I who have committed this murder, I can think of seven most plausible
stories! Far more convincing than Mr. Inglethorp s stony denials!
I could not help laughing.
My dear Poirot, I am sure you are capable of thinking of seventy! But,
seriously, in spite of what I heard you say to the detectives, you
surely cannot still believe in the possibility of Alfred Inglethorp s
innocence?
Why not now as much as before? Nothing has changed.
But the evidence is so conclusive.
Yes, too conclusive.
We turned in at the gate of Leastways Cottage, and proceeded up the now
familiar stairs.
Yes, yes, too conclusive, continued Poirot, almost to himself. Real
evidence is usually vague and unsatisfactory. It has to be
examined sifted. But here the whole thing is cut and dried. No, my
friend, this evidence has been very cleverly manufactured so cleverly
that it has defeated its own ends.
How do you make that out?
Because, so long as the evidence against him was vague and intangible,
it was very hard to disprove. But, in his anxiety, the criminal has
drawn the net so closely that one cut will set Inglethorp free.
I was silent. And in a minute or two, Poirot continued:
Let us look at the matter like this. Here is a man, let us say, who
sets out to poison his wife. He has lived by his wits as the saying
goes. Presumably, therefore, he has some wits. He is not altogether a
fool. Well, how does he set about it? He goes boldly to the village
chemist s and purchases strychnine under his own name, with a trumped
up story about a dog which is bound to be proved absurd. He does not
employ the poison that night. No, he waits until he has had a violent
quarrel with her, of which the whole household is cognisant, and which
naturally directs their suspicions upon him. He prepares no defence no
shadow of an alibi, yet he knows the chemist s assistant must
necessarily come forward with the facts. Bah! Do not ask me to believe
that any man could be so idiotic! Only a lunatic, who wished to commit
suicide by causing himself to be hanged, would act so!
Still I do not see I began.
Neither do I see. I tell you, mon ami , it puzzles me. Me Hercule
Poirot!
But if you believe him innocent, how do you explain his buying the
strychnine?
Very simply. He did not buy it.
But Mace recognized him!
I beg your pardon, he saw a man with a black beard like Mr.
Inglethorp s, and wearing glasses like Mr. Inglethorp, and dressed in
Mr. Inglethorp s rather noticeable clothes. He could not recognize a
man whom he had probably only seen in the distance, since, you
remember, he himself had only been in the village a fortnight, and Mrs.
Inglethorp dealt principally with Coot s in Tadminster.
Then you think
Mon ami , do you remember the two points I laid stress upon? Leave
the first one for the moment, what was the second?
The important fact that Alfred Inglethorp wears peculiar clothes, has
a black beard, and uses glasses, I quoted.
Exactly. Now suppose anyone wished to pass himself off as John or
Lawrence Cavendish. Would it be easy?
No, I said thoughtfully. Of course an actor
But Poirot cut me short ruthlessly.
And why would it not be easy? I will tell you, my friend: Because they
are both clean shaven men. To make up successfully as one of these two
in broad daylight, it would need an actor of genius, and a certain
initial facial resemblance. But in the case of Alfred Inglethorp, all
that is changed. His clothes, his beard, the glasses which hide his
eyes those are the salient points about his personal appearance. Now,
what is the first instinct of the criminal? To divert suspicion from
himself, is it not so? And how can he best do that? By throwing it on
someone else. In this instance, there was a man ready to his hand.
Everybody was predisposed to believe in Mr. Inglethorp s guilt. It was
a foregone conclusion that he would be suspected; but, to make it a
sure thing there must be tangible proof such as the actual buying of
the poison, and that, with a man of the peculiar appearance of Mr.
Inglethorp, was not difficult. Remember, this young Mace had never
actually spoken to Mr. Inglethorp. How should he doubt that the man in
his clothes, with his beard and his glasses, was not Alfred
Inglethorp?
It may be so, I said, fascinated by Poirot s eloquence. But, if that
was the case, why does he not say where he was at six o clock on Monday
evening?
Ah, why indeed? said Poirot, calming down. If he were arrested, he
probably would speak, but I do not want it to come to that. I must make
him see the gravity of his position. There is, of course, something
discreditable behind his silence. If he did not murder his wife, he is,
nevertheless, a scoundrel, and has something of his own to conceal,
quite apart from the murder.
What can it be? I mused, won over to Poirot s views for the moment,
although still retaining a faint conviction that the obvious deduction
was the correct one.
Can you not guess? asked Poirot, smiling.
No, can you?
Oh, yes, I had a little idea sometime ago and it has turned out to be
correct.
You never told me, I said reproachfully.
Poirot spread out his hands apologetically.
Pardon me, mon ami , you were not precisely sympathique . He turned
to me earnestly. Tell me you see now that he must not be arrested?
Perhaps, I said doubtfully, for I was really quite indifferent to the
fate of Alfred Inglethorp, and thought that a good fright would do him
no harm.
Poirot, who was watching me intently, gave a sigh.
Come, my friend, he said, changing the subject, apart from Mr.
Inglethorp, how did the evidence at the inquest strike you?
Oh, pretty much what I expected.
Did nothing strike you as peculiar about it?
My thoughts flew to Mary Cavendish, and I hedged:
In what way?
Well, Mr. Lawrence Cavendish s evidence for instance?
I was relieved.
Oh, Lawrence! No, I don t think so. He s always a nervous chap.
His suggestion that his mother might have been poisoned accidentally
by means of the tonic she was taking, that did not strike you as
strange hein?
No, I can t say it did. The doctors ridiculed it of course. But it was
quite a natural suggestion for a layman to make.
But Monsieur Lawrence is not a layman. You told me yourself that he
had started by studying medicine, and that he had taken his degree.
Yes, that s true. I never thought of that. I was rather startled. It
is odd.
Poirot nodded.
From the first, his behaviour has been peculiar. Of all the household,
he alone would be likely to recognize the symptoms of strychnine
poisoning, and yet we find him the only member of the family to uphold
strenuously the theory of death from natural causes. If it had been
Monsieur John, I could have understood it. He has no technical
knowledge, and is by nature unimaginative. But Monsieur Lawrence no!
And now, to day, he puts forward a suggestion that he himself must have
known was ridiculous. There is food for thought in this, mon ami!
It s very confusing, I agreed.
Then there is Mrs. Cavendish, continued Poirot. That s another who
is not telling all she knows! What do you make of her attitude?
I don t know what to make of it. It seems inconceivable that she
should be shielding Alfred Inglethorp. Yet that is what it looks like.
Poirot nodded reflectively.
Yes, it is queer. One thing is certain, she overheard a good deal more
of that private conversation than she was willing to admit.
And yet she is the last person one would accuse of stooping to
eavesdrop!
Exactly. One thing her evidence has shown me. I made a mistake.
Dorcas was quite right. The quarrel did take place earlier in the
afternoon, about four o clock, as she said.
I looked at him curiously. I had never understood his insistence on
that point.
Yes, a good deal that was peculiar came out to day, continued Poirot.
Dr. Bauerstein, now, what was he doing up and dressed at that hour
in the morning? It is astonishing to me that no one commented on the
fact.
He has insomnia, I believe, I said doubtfully.
Which is a very good, or a very bad explanation, remarked Poirot. It
covers everything, and explains nothing. I shall keep my eye on our
clever Dr. Bauerstein.
Any more faults to find with the evidence? I inquired satirically.
Mon ami , replied Poirot gravely, when you find that people are not
telling you the truth look out! Now, unless I am much mistaken, at the
inquest to day only one at most, two persons were speaking the truth
without reservation or subterfuge.
Oh, come now, Poirot! I won t cite Lawrence, or Mrs. Cavendish. But
there s John and Miss Howard, surely they were speaking the truth?
Both of them, my friend? One, I grant you, but both !
His words gave me an unpleasant shock. Miss Howard s evidence,
unimportant as it was, had been given in such a downright
straightforward manner that it had never occurred to me to doubt her
sincerity. Still, I had a great respect for Poirot s sagacity except on
the occasions when he was what I described to myself as foolishly
pig headed.
Do you really think so? I asked. Miss Howard had always seemed to me
so essentially honest almost uncomfortably so.
Poirot gave me a curious look, which I could not quite fathom. He
seemed to speak, and then checked himself.
Miss Murdoch too, I continued, there s nothing untruthful about
her .
No. But it was strange that she never heard a sound, sleeping next
door; whereas Mrs. Cavendish, in the other wing of the building,
distinctly heard the table fall.
Well, she s young. And she sleeps soundly.
Ah, yes, indeed! She must be a famous sleeper, that one!
I did not quite like the tone of his voice, but at that moment a smart
knock reached our ears, and looking out of the window we perceived the
two detectives waiting for us below.
Poirot seized his hat, gave a ferocious twist to his moustache, and,
carefully brushing an imaginary speck of dust from his sleeve, motioned
me to precede him down the stairs; there we joined the detectives and
set out for Styles.
I think the appearance of the two Scotland Yard men was rather a
shock especially to John, though of course after the verdict, he had
realized that it was only a matter of time. Still, the presence of the
detectives brought the truth home to him more than anything else could
have done.
Poirot had conferred with Japp in a low tone on the way up, and it was
the latter functionary who requested that the household, with the
exception of the servants, should be assembled together in the
drawing room. I realized the significance of this. It was up to Poirot
to make his boast good.
Personally, I was not sanguine. Poirot might have excellent reasons for
his belief in Inglethorp s innocence, but a man of the type of
Summerhaye would require tangible proofs, and these I doubted if Poirot
could supply.
Before very long we had all trooped into the drawing room, the door of
which Japp closed. Poirot politely set chairs for everyone. The
Scotland Yard men were the cynosure of all eyes. I think that for the
first time we realized that the thing was not a bad dream, but a
tangible reality. We had read of such things now we ourselves were
actors in the drama. To morrow the daily papers, all over England,
would blazon out the news in staring headlines:
MYSTERIOUS TRAGEDY IN ESSEX
WEALTHY LADY POISONED
There would be pictures of Styles, snap shots of The family leaving
the Inquest the village photographer had not been idle! All the things
that one had read a hundred times things that happen to other people,
not to oneself. And now, in this house, a murder had been committed. In
front of us were the detectives in charge of the case. The well known
glib phraseology passed rapidly through my mind in the interval before
Poirot opened the proceedings.
I think everyone was a little surprised that it should be he and not
one of the official detectives who took the initiative.
Mesdames and messieurs , said Poirot, bowing as though he were a
celebrity about to deliver a lecture, I have asked you to come here
all together, for a certain object. That object, it concerns Mr. Alfred
Inglethorp.
Inglethorp was sitting a little by himself I think, unconsciously,
everyone had drawn his chair slightly away from him and he gave a faint
start as Poirot pronounced his name.
Mr. Inglethorp, said Poirot, addressing him directly, a very dark
shadow is resting on this house the shadow of murder.
Inglethorp shook his head sadly.
My poor wife, he murmured. Poor Emily! It is terrible.
I do not think, monsieur, said Poirot pointedly, that you quite
realize how terrible it may be for you. And as Inglethorp did not
appear to understand, he added: Mr. Inglethorp, you are standing in
very grave danger.
The two detectives fidgeted. I saw the official caution Anything you
say will be used in evidence against you, actually hovering on
Summerhaye s lips. Poirot went on.
Do you understand now, monsieur?
No. What do you mean?
I mean, said Poirot deliberately, that you are suspected of
poisoning your wife.
A little gasp ran round the circle at this plain speaking.
Good heavens! cried Inglethorp, starting up. What a monstrous idea!
I poison my dearest Emily!
I do not think Poirot watched him narrowly that you quite realize
the unfavourable nature of your evidence at the inquest. Mr.
Inglethorp, knowing what I have now told you, do you still refuse to
say where you were at six o clock on Monday afternoon?
With a groan, Alfred Inglethorp sank down again and buried his face in
his hands. Poirot approached and stood over him.
Speak! he cried menacingly.
With an effort, Inglethorp raised his face from his hands. Then, slowly
and deliberately, he shook his head.
You will not speak?
No. I do not believe that anyone could be so monstrous as to accuse me
of what you say.
Poirot nodded thoughtfully, like a man whose mind is made up.
Soit! he said. Then I must speak for you.
Alfred Inglethorp sprang up again.
You? How can you speak? You do not know he broke off abruptly.
Poirot turned to face us. Mesdames and messieurs ! I speak! Listen!
I, Hercule Poirot, affirm that the man who entered the chemist s shop,
and purchased strychnine at six o clock on Monday last was not Mr.
Inglethorp, for at six o clock on that day Mr. Inglethorp was escorting
Mrs. Raikes back to her home from a neighbouring farm. I can produce no
less than five witnesses to swear to having seen them together, either
at six or just after and, as you may know, the Abbey Farm, Mrs.
Raikes s home, is at least two and a half miles distant from the
village. There is absolutely no question as to the alibi!
CHAPTER VIII. FRESH SUSPICIONS
There was a moment s stupefied silence. Japp, who was the least
surprised of any of us, was the first to speak.
My word, he cried, you re the goods! And no mistake, Mr. Poirot!
These witnesses of yours are all right, I suppose?
Voil ! I have prepared a list of them names and addresses. You must
see them, of course. But you will find it all right.
I m sure of that. Japp lowered his voice. I m much obliged to you. A
pretty mare s nest arresting him would have been. He turned to
Inglethorp. But, if you ll excuse me, sir, why couldn t you say all
this at the inquest?
I will tell you why, interrupted Poirot. There was a certain
rumour
A most malicious and utterly untrue one, interrupted Alfred
Inglethorp in an agitated voice.
And Mr. Inglethorp was anxious to have no scandal revived just at
present. Am I right?
Quite right. Inglethorp nodded. With my poor Emily not yet buried,
can you wonder I was anxious that no more lying rumours should be
started.
Between you and me, sir, remarked Japp, I d sooner have any amount
of rumours than be arrested for murder. And I venture to think your
poor lady would have felt the same. And, if it hadn t been for Mr.
Poirot here, arrested you would have been, as sure as eggs is eggs!
I was foolish, no doubt, murmured Inglethorp. But you do not know,
inspector, how I have been persecuted and maligned. And he shot a
baleful glance at Evelyn Howard.
Now, sir, said Japp, turning briskly to John, I should like to see
the lady s bedroom, please, and after that I ll have a little chat with
the servants. Don t you bother about anything. Mr. Poirot, here, will
show me the way.
As they all went out of the room, Poirot turned and made me a sign to
follow him upstairs. There he caught me by the arm, and drew me aside.
Quick, go to the other wing. Stand there just this side of the baize
door. Do not move till I come. Then, turning rapidly, he rejoined the
two detectives.
I followed his instructions, taking up my position by the baize door,
and wondering what on earth lay behind the request. Why was I to stand
in this particular spot on guard? I looked thoughtfully down the
corridor in front of me. An idea struck me. With the exception of
Cynthia Murdoch s, everyone s room was in this left wing. Had that
anything to do with it? Was I to report who came or went? I stood
faithfully at my post. The minutes passed. Nobody came. Nothing
happened.
It must have been quite twenty minutes before Poirot rejoined me.
You have not stirred?
No, I ve stuck here like a rock. Nothing s happened.
Ah! Was he pleased, or disappointed? You ve seen nothing at all?
No.
But you have probably heard something? A big bump eh, mon ami?
No.
Is it possible? Ah, but I am vexed with myself! I am not usually
clumsy. I made but a slight gesture I know Poirot s gestures with the
left hand, and over went the table by the bed!
He looked so childishly vexed and crest fallen that I hastened to
console him.
Never mind, old chap. What does it matter? Your triumph downstairs
excited you. I can tell you, that was a surprise to us all. There must
be more in this affair of Inglethorp s with Mrs. Raikes than we
thought, to make him hold his tongue so persistently. What are you
going to do now? Where are the Scotland Yard fellows?
Gone down to interview the servants. I showed them all our exhibits. I
am disappointed in Japp. He has no method!
Hullo! I said, looking out of the window. Here s Dr. Bauerstein. I
believe you re right about that man, Poirot. I don t like him.
He is clever, observed Poirot meditatively.
Oh, clever as the devil! I must say I was overjoyed to see him in the
plight he was in on Tuesday. You never saw such a spectacle! And I
described the doctor s adventure. He looked a regular scarecrow!
Plastered with mud from head to foot.
You saw him, then?
Yes. Of course, he didn t want to come in it was just after dinner but
Mr. Inglethorp insisted.
What? Poirot caught me violently by the shoulders. Was Dr.
Bauerstein here on Tuesday evening? Here? And you never told me? Why
did you not tell me? Why? Why?
He appeared to be in an absolute frenzy.
My dear Poirot, I expostulated, I never thought it would interest
you. I didn t know it was of any importance.
Importance? It is of the first importance! So Dr. Bauerstein was here
on Tuesday night the night of the murder. Hastings, do you not see?
That alters everything everything!
I had never seen him so upset. Loosening his hold of me, he
mechanically straightened a pair of candlesticks, still murmuring to
himself: Yes, that alters everything everything.
Suddenly he seemed to come to a decision.
Allons! he said. We must act at once. Where is Mr. Cavendish?
John was in the smoking room. Poirot went straight to him.
Mr. Cavendish, I have some important business in Tadminster. A new
clue. May I take your motor?
Why, of course. Do you mean at once?
If you please.
John rang the bell, and ordered round the car. In another ten minutes,
we were racing down the park and along the high road to Tadminster.
Now, Poirot, I remarked resignedly, perhaps you will tell me what
all this is about?
Well, mon ami , a good deal you can guess for yourself. Of course you
realize that, now Mr. Inglethorp is out of it, the whole position is
greatly changed. We are face to face with an entirely new problem. We
know now that there is one person who did not buy the poison. We have
cleared away the manufactured clues. Now for the real ones. I have
ascertained that anyone in the household, with the exception of Mrs.
Cavendish, who was playing tennis with you, could have personated Mr.
Inglethorp on Monday evening. In the same way, we have his statement
that he put the coffee down in the hall. No one took much notice of
that at the inquest but now it has a very different significance. We
must find out who did take that coffee to Mrs. Inglethorp eventually,
or who passed through the hall whilst it was standing there. From your
account, there are only two people whom we can positively say did not
go near the coffee Mrs. Cavendish, and Mademoiselle Cynthia.
Yes, that is so. I felt an inexpressible lightening of the heart.
Mary Cavendish could certainly not rest under suspicion.
In clearing Alfred Inglethorp, continued Poirot, I have been obliged
to show my hand sooner than I intended. As long as I might be thought
to be pursuing him, the criminal would be off his guard. Now, he will
be doubly careful. Yes doubly careful. He turned to me abruptly. Tell
me, Hastings, you yourself have you no suspicions of anybody?
I hesitated. To tell the truth, an idea, wild and extravagant in
itself, had once or twice that morning flashed through my brain. I had
rejected it as absurd, nevertheless it persisted.
You couldn t call it a suspicion, I murmured. It s so utterly
foolish.
Come now, urged Poirot encouragingly. Do not fear. Speak your mind.
You should always pay attention to your instincts.
Well then, I blurted out, it s absurd but I suspect Miss Howard of
not telling all she knows!
Miss Howard?
Yes you ll laugh at me
Not at all. Why should I?
I can t help feeling, I continued blunderingly; that we ve rather
left her out of the possible suspects, simply on the strength of her
having been away from the place. But, after all, she was only fifteen
miles away. A car would do it in half an hour. Can we say positively
that she was away from Styles on the night of the murder?
Yes, my friend, said Poirot unexpectedly, we can. One of my first
actions was to ring up the hospital where she was working.
Well?
Well, I learnt that Miss Howard had been on afternoon duty on Tuesday,
and that a convoy coming in unexpectedly she had kindly offered to
remain on night duty, which offer was gratefully accepted. That
disposes of that.
Oh! I said, rather nonplussed. Really, I continued, it s her
extraordinary vehemence against Inglethorp that started me off
suspecting her. I can t help feeling she d do anything against him. And
I had an idea she might know something about the destroying of the
will. She might have burnt the new one, mistaking it for the earlier
one in his favour. She is so terribly bitter against him.
You consider her vehemence unnatural?
Y es. She is so very violent. I wondered really whether she is quite
sane on that point.
Poirot shook his head energetically.
No, no, you are on a wrong tack there. There is nothing weak minded or
degenerate about Miss Howard. She is an excellent specimen of
well balanced English beef and brawn. She is sanity itself.
Yet her hatred of Inglethorp seems almost a mania. My idea was a very
ridiculous one, no doubt that she had intended to poison him and that,
in some way, Mrs. Inglethorp got hold of it by mistake. But I don t at
all see how it could have been done. The whole thing is absurd and
ridiculous to the last degree.
Still you are right in one thing. It is always wise to suspect
everybody until you can prove logically, and to your own satisfaction,
that they are innocent. Now, what reasons are there against Miss
Howard s having deliberately poisoned Mrs. Inglethorp?
Why, she was devoted to her! I exclaimed.
Tcha! Tcha! cried Poirot irritably. You argue like a child. If Miss
Howard were capable of poisoning the old lady, she would be quite
equally capable of simulating devotion. No, we must look elsewhere. You
are perfectly correct in your assumption that her vehemence against
Alfred Inglethorp is too violent to be natural; but you are quite wrong
in the deduction you draw from it. I have drawn my own deductions,
which I believe to be correct, but I will not speak of them at
present. He paused a minute, then went on. Now, to my way of
thinking, there is one insuperable objection to Miss Howard s being the
murderess.
And that is?
That in no possible way could Mrs. Inglethorp s death benefit Miss
Howard. Now there is no murder without a motive.
I reflected.
Could not Mrs. Inglethorp have made a will in her favour?
Poirot shook his head.
But you yourself suggested that possibility to Mr. Wells?
Poirot smiled.
That was for a reason. I did not want to mention the name of the
person who was actually in my mind. Miss Howard occupied very much the
same position, so I used her name instead.
Still, Mrs. Inglethorp might have done so. Why, that will, made on the
afternoon of her death may
But Poirot s shake of the head was so energetic that I stopped.
No, my friend. I have certain little ideas of my own about that will.
But I can tell you this much it was not in Miss Howard s favour.
I accepted his assurance, though I did not really see how he could be
so positive about the matter.
Well, I said, with a sigh, we will acquit Miss Howard, then. It is
partly your fault that I ever came to suspect her. It was what you said
about her evidence at the inquest that set me off.
Poirot looked puzzled.
What did I say about her evidence at the inquest?
Don t you remember? When I cited her and John Cavendish as being above
suspicion?
Oh ah yes. He seemed a little confused, but recovered himself. By
the way, Hastings, there is something I want you to do for me.
Certainly. What is it?
Next time you happen to be alone with Lawrence Cavendish, I want you
to say this to him. I have a message for you, from Poirot. He says:
Find the extra coffee cup, and you can rest in peace! Nothing more.
Nothing less.
Find the extra coffee cup, and you can rest in peace. Is that
right? I asked, much mystified.
Excellent.
But what does it mean?
Ah, that I will leave you to find out. You have access to the facts.
Just say that to him, and see what he says.
Very well but it s all extremely mysterious.
We were running into Tadminster now, and Poirot directed the car to the
Analytical Chemist.
Poirot hopped down briskly, and went inside. In a few minutes he was
back again.
There, he said. That is all my business.
What were you doing there? I asked, in lively curiosity.
I left something to be analysed.
Yes, but what?
The sample of cocoa I took from the saucepan in the bedroom.
But that has already been tested! I cried, stupefied. Dr. Bauerstein
had it tested, and you yourself laughed at the possibility of there
being strychnine in it.
I know Dr. Bauerstein had it tested, replied Poirot quietly.
Well, then?
Well, I have a fancy for having it analysed again, that is all.
And not another word on the subject could I drag out of him.
This proceeding of Poirot s, in respect of the cocoa, puzzled me
intensely. I could see neither rhyme nor reason in it. However, my
confidence in him, which at one time had rather waned, was fully
restored since his belief in Alfred Inglethorp s innocence had been so
triumphantly vindicated.
The funeral of Mrs. Inglethorp took place the following day, and on
Monday, as I came down to a late breakfast, John drew me aside, and
informed me that Mr. Inglethorp was leaving that morning, to take up
his quarters at the Stylites Arms until he should have completed his
plans.
And really it s a great relief to think he s going, Hastings,
continued my honest friend. It was bad enough before, when we thought
he d done it, but I m hanged if it isn t worse now, when we all feel
guilty for having been so down on the fellow. The fact is, we ve
treated him abominably. Of course, things did look black against him. I
don t see how anyone could blame us for jumping to the conclusions we
did. Still, there it is, we were in the wrong, and now there s a
beastly feeling that one ought to make amends; which is difficult, when
one doesn t like the fellow a bit better than one did before. The whole
thing s damned awkward! And I m thankful he s had the tact to take
himself off. It s a good thing Styles wasn t the mater s to leave to
him. Couldn t bear to think of the fellow lording it here. He s welcome
to her money.
You ll be able to keep up the place all right? I asked.
Oh, yes. There are the death duties, of course, but half my father s
money goes with the place, and Lawrence will stay with us for the
present, so there is his share as well. We shall be pinched at first,
of course, because, as I once told you, I am in a bit of a hole
financially myself. Still, the Johnnies will wait now.
In the general relief at Inglethorp s approaching departure, we had the
most genial breakfast we had experienced since the tragedy. Cynthia,
whose young spirits were naturally buoyant, was looking quite her
pretty self again, and we all, with the exception of Lawrence, who
seemed unalterably gloomy and nervous, were quietly cheerful, at the
opening of a new and hopeful future.
The papers, of course, had been full of the tragedy. Glaring headlines,
sandwiched biographies of every member of the household, subtle
innuendoes, the usual familiar tag about the police having a clue.
Nothing was spared us. It was a slack time. The war was momentarily
inactive, and the newspapers seized with avidity on this crime in
fashionable life: The Mysterious Affair at Styles was the topic of
the moment.
Naturally it was very annoying for the Cavendishes. The house was
constantly besieged by reporters, who were consistently denied
admission, but who continued to haunt the village and the grounds,
where they lay in wait with cameras, for any unwary members of the
household. We all lived in a blast of publicity. The Scotland Yard men
came and went, examining, questioning, lynx eyed and reserved of
tongue. Towards what end they were working, we did not know. Had they
any clue, or would the whole thing remain in the category of
undiscovered crimes?
After breakfast, Dorcas came up to me rather mysteriously, and asked if
she might have a few words with me.
Certainly. What is it, Dorcas?
Well, it s just this, sir. You ll be seeing the Belgian gentleman
to day perhaps? I nodded. Well, sir, you know how he asked me so
particular if the mistress, or anyone else, had a green dress?
Yes, yes. You have found one? My interest was aroused.
No, not that, sir. But since then I ve remembered what the young
gentlemen John and Lawrence were still the young gentlemen to
Dorcas call the dressing up box. It s up in the front attic, sir. A
great chest, full of old clothes and fancy dresses, and what not. And
it came to me sudden like that there might be a green dress amongst
them. So, if you d tell the Belgian gentleman
I will tell him, Dorcas, I promised.
Thank you very much, sir. A very nice gentleman he is, sir. And quite
a different class from them two detectives from London, what goes
prying about, and asking questions. I don t hold with foreigners as a
rule, but from what the newspapers say I make out as how these brave
Belges isn t the ordinary run of foreigners, and certainly he s a most
polite spoken gentleman.
Dear old Dorcas! As she stood there, with her honest face upturned to
mine, I thought what a fine specimen she was of the old fashioned
servant that is so fast dying out.
I thought I might as well go down to the village at once, and look up
Poirot; but I met him half way, coming up to the house, and at once
gave him Dorcas s message.
Ah, the brave Dorcas! We will look at the chest, although but no
matter we will examine it all the same.
We entered the house by one of the windows. There was no one in the
hall, and we went straight up to the attic.
Sure enough, there was the chest, a fine old piece, all studded with
brass nails, and full to overflowing with every imaginable type of
garment.
Poirot bundled everything out on the floor with scant ceremony. There
were one or two green fabrics of varying shades; but Poirot shook his
head over them all. He seemed somewhat apathetic in the search, as
though he expected no great results from it. Suddenly he gave an
exclamation.
What is it?
Look!
The chest was nearly empty, and there, reposing right at the bottom,
was a magnificent black beard.
Oh ! said Poirot. Oh ! He turned it over in his hands,
examining it closely. New, he remarked. Yes, quite new.
After a moment s hesitation, he replaced it in the chest, heaped all
the other things on top of it as before, and made his way briskly
downstairs. He went straight to the pantry, where we found Dorcas
busily polishing her silver.
Poirot wished her good morning with Gallic politeness, and went on:
We have been looking through that chest, Dorcas. I am much obliged to
you for mentioning it. There is, indeed, a fine collection there. Are
they often used, may I ask?
Well, sir, not very often nowadays, though from time to time we do
have what the young gentlemen call a dress up night. And very funny
it is sometimes, sir. Mr. Lawrence, he s wonderful. Most comic! I shall
never forget the night he came down as the Char of Persia, I think he
called it a sort of Eastern King it was. He had the big paper knife in
his hand, and Mind, Dorcas, he says, you ll have to be very
respectful. This is my specially sharpened scimitar, and it s off with
your head if I m at all displeased with you! Miss Cynthia, she was
what they call an Apache, or some such name a Frenchified sort of
cut throat, I take it to be. A real sight she looked. You d never have
believed a pretty young lady like that could have made herself into
such a ruffian. Nobody would have known her.
These evenings must have been great fun, said Poirot genially. I
suppose Mr. Lawrence wore that fine black beard in the chest upstairs,
when he was Shah of Persia?
He did have a beard, sir, replied Dorcas, smiling. And well I know
it, for he borrowed two skeins of my black wool to make it with! And
I m sure it looked wonderfully natural at a distance. I didn t know as
there was a beard up there at all. It must have been got quite lately,
I think. There was a red wig, I know, but nothing else in the way of
hair. Burnt corks they use mostly though tis messy getting it off
again. Miss Cynthia was a nigger once, and, oh, the trouble she had.
So Dorcas knows nothing about that black beard, said Poirot
thoughtfully, as we walked out into the hall again.
Do you think it is the one? I whispered eagerly.
Poirot nodded.
I do. You notice it had been trimmed?
No.
Yes. It was cut exactly the shape of Mr. Inglethorp s, and I found one
or two snipped hairs. Hastings, this affair is very deep.
Who put it in the chest, I wonder?
Someone with a good deal of intelligence, remarked Poirot dryly. You
realize that he chose the one place in the house to hide it where its
presence would not be remarked? Yes, he is intelligent. But we must be
more intelligent. We must be so intelligent that he does not suspect us
of being intelligent at all.
I acquiesced.
There, mon ami , you will be of great assistance to me.
I was pleased with the compliment. There had been times when I hardly
thought that Poirot appreciated me at my true worth.
Yes, he continued, staring at me thoughtfully, you will be
invaluable.
This was naturally gratifying, but Poirot s next words were not so
welcome.
I must have an ally in the house, he observed reflectively.
You have me, I protested.
True, but you are not sufficient.
I was hurt, and showed it. Poirot hurried to explain himself.
You do not quite take my meaning. You are known to be working with me.
I want somebody who is not associated with us in any way.
Oh, I see. How about John?
No, I think not.
The dear fellow isn t perhaps very bright, I said thoughtfully.
Here comes Miss Howard, said Poirot suddenly. She is the very
person. But I am in her black books, since I cleared Mr. Inglethorp.
Still, we can but try.
With a nod that was barely civil, Miss Howard assented to Poirot s
request for a few minutes conversation.
We went into the little morning room, and Poirot closed the door.
Well, Monsieur Poirot, said Miss Howard impatiently, what is it? Out
with it. I m busy.
Do you remember, mademoiselle, that I once asked you to help me?
Yes, I do. The lady nodded. And I told you I d help you with
pleasure to hang Alfred Inglethorp.
Ah! Poirot studied her seriously. Miss Howard, I will ask you one
question. I beg of you to reply to it truthfully.
Never tell lies, replied Miss Howard.
It is this. Do you still believe that Mrs. Inglethorp was poisoned by
her husband?
What do you mean? she asked sharply. You needn t think your pretty
explanations influence me in the slightest. I ll admit that it wasn t
he who bought strychnine at the chemist s shop. What of that? I dare
say he soaked fly paper, as I told you at the beginning.
That is arsenic not strychnine, said Poirot mildly.
What does that matter? Arsenic would put poor Emily out of the way
just as well as strychnine. If I m convinced he did it, it doesn t
matter a jot to me how he did it.
Exactly. If you are convinced he did it, said Poirot quietly. I
will put my question in another form. Did you ever in your heart of
hearts believe that Mrs. Inglethorp was poisoned by her husband?
Good heavens! cried Miss Howard. Haven t I always told you the man
is a villain? Haven t I always told you he would murder her in her bed?
Haven t I always hated him like poison?
Exactly, said Poirot. That bears out my little idea entirely.
What little idea?
Miss Howard, do you remember a conversation that took place on the day
of my friend s arrival here? He repeated it to me, and there is a
sentence of yours that has impressed me very much. Do you remember
affirming that if a crime had been committed, and anyone you loved had
been murdered, you felt certain that you would know by instinct who the
criminal was, even if you were quite unable to prove it?
Yes, I remember saying that. I believe it too. I suppose you think it
nonsense?
Not at all.
And yet you will pay no attention to my instinct against Alfred
Inglethorp.
No, said Poirot curtly. Because your instinct is not against Mr.
Inglethorp.
What?
No. You wish to believe he committed the crime. You believe him
capable of committing it. But your instinct tells you he did not commit
it. It tells you more shall I go on?
She was staring at him, fascinated, and made a slight affirmative
movement of the hand.
Shall I tell you why you have been so vehement against Mr. Inglethorp?
It is because you have been trying to believe what you wish to believe.
It is because you are trying to drown and stifle your instinct, which
tells you another name
No, no, no! cried Miss Howard wildly, flinging up her hands. Don t
say it! Oh, don t say it! It isn t true! It can t be true. I don t know
what put such a wild such a dreadful idea into my head!
I am right, am I not? asked Poirot.
Yes, yes; you must be a wizard to have guessed. But it can t be
so it s too monstrous, too impossible. It must be Alfred Inglethorp.
Poirot shook his head gravely.
Don t ask me about it, continued Miss Howard, because I shan t tell
you. I won t admit it, even to myself. I must be mad to think of such a
thing.
Poirot nodded, as if satisfied.
I will ask you nothing. It is enough for me that it is as I thought.
And I I, too, have an instinct. We are working together towards a
common end.
Don t ask me to help you, because I won t. I wouldn t lift a finger
to to She faltered.
You will help me in spite of yourself. I ask you nothing but you will
be my ally. You will not be able to help yourself. You will do the only
thing that I want of you.
And that is?
You will watch!
Evelyn Howard bowed her head.
Yes, I can t help doing that. I am always watching always hoping I
shall be proved wrong.
If we are wrong, well and good, said Poirot. No one will be more
pleased than I shall. But, if we are right? If we are right, Miss
Howard, on whose side are you then?
I don t know, I don t know
Come now.
It could be hushed up.
There must be no hushing up.
But Emily herself She broke off.
Miss Howard, said Poirot gravely, this is unworthy of you.
Suddenly she took her face from her hands.
Yes, she said quietly, that was not Evelyn Howard who spoke! She
flung her head up proudly. This is Evelyn Howard! And she is on the
side of Justice! Let the cost be what it may. And with these words,
she walked firmly out of the room.
There, said Poirot, looking after her, goes a very valuable ally.
That woman, Hastings, has got brains as well as a heart.
I did not reply.
Instinct is a marvellous thing, mused Poirot. It can neither be
explained nor ignored.
You and Miss Howard seem to know what you are talking about, I
observed coldly. Perhaps you don t realize that I am still in the
dark.
Really? Is that so, mon ami?
Yes. Enlighten me, will you?
Poirot studied me attentively for a moment or two. Then, to my intense
surprise, he shook his head decidedly.
No, my friend.
Oh, look here, why not?
Two is enough for a secret.
Well, I think it is very unfair to keep back facts from me.
I am not keeping back facts. Every fact that I know is in your
possession. You can draw your own deductions from them. This time it is
a question of ideas.
Still, it would be interesting to know.
Poirot looked at me very earnestly, and again shook his head.
You see, he said sadly, you have no instincts.
It was intelligence you were requiring just now, I pointed out.
The two often go together, said Poirot enigmatically.
The remark seemed so utterly irrelevant that I did not even take the
trouble to answer it. But I decided that if I made any interesting and
important discoveries as no doubt I should I would keep them to myself,
and surprise Poirot with the ultimate result.
There are times when it is one s duty to assert oneself.
CHAPTER IX. DR. BAUERSTEIN
I had had no opportunity as yet of passing on Poirot s message to
Lawrence. But now, as I strolled out on the lawn, still nursing a
grudge against my friend s high handedness, I saw Lawrence on the
croquet lawn, aimlessly knocking a couple of very ancient balls about,
with a still more ancient mallet.
It struck me that it would be a good opportunity to deliver my message.
Otherwise, Poirot himself might relieve me of it. It was true that I
did not quite gather its purport, but I flattered myself that by
Lawrence s reply, and perhaps a little skillful cross examination on my
part, I should soon perceive its significance. Accordingly I accosted
him.
I ve been looking for you, I remarked untruthfully.
Have you?
Yes. The truth is, I ve got a message for you from Poirot.
Yes?
He told me to wait until I was alone with you, I said, dropping my
voice significantly, and watching him intently out of the corner of my
eye. I have always been rather good at what is called, I believe,
creating an atmosphere.
Well?
There was no change of expression in the dark melancholic face. Had he
any idea of what I was about to say?
This is the message. I dropped my voice still lower. Find the extra
coffee cup, and you can rest in peace.
What on earth does he mean? Lawrence stared at me in quite unaffected
astonishment.
Don t you know?
Not in the least. Do you?
I was compelled to shake my head.
What extra coffee cup?
I don t know.
He d better ask Dorcas, or one of the maids, if he wants to know about
coffee cups. It s their business, not mine. I don t know anything about
the coffee cups, except that we ve got some that are never used, which
are a perfect dream! Old Worcester. You re not a connoisseur, are you,
Hastings?
I shook my head.
You miss a lot. A really perfect bit of old china it s pure delight to
handle it, or even to look at it.
Well, what am I to tell Poirot?
Tell him I don t know what he s talking about. It s double Dutch to
me.
All right.
I was moving off towards the house again when he suddenly called me
back.
I say, what was the end of that message? Say it over again, will you?
Find the extra coffee cup, and you can rest in peace. Are you sure
you don t know what it means? I asked him earnestly.
He shook his head.
No, he said musingly, I don t. I I wish I did.
The boom of the gong sounded from the house, and we went in together.
Poirot had been asked by John to remain to lunch, and was already
seated at the table.
By tacit consent, all mention of the tragedy was barred. We conversed
on the war, and other outside topics. But after the cheese and biscuits
had been handed round, and Dorcas had left the room, Poirot suddenly
leant forward to Mrs. Cavendish.
Pardon me, madame, for recalling unpleasant memories, but I have a
little idea Poirot s little ideas were becoming a perfect
byword and would like to ask one or two questions.
Of me? Certainly.
You are too amiable, madame. What I want to ask is this: the door
leading into Mrs. Inglethorp s room from that of Mademoiselle Cynthia,
it was bolted, you say?
Certainly it was bolted, replied Mary Cavendish, rather surprised. I
said so at the inquest.
Bolted?
Yes. She looked perplexed.
I mean, explained Poirot, you are sure it was bolted, and not merely
locked?
Oh, I see what you mean. No, I don t know. I said bolted, meaning that
it was fastened, and I could not open it, but I believe all the doors
were found bolted on the inside.
Still, as far as you are concerned, the door might equally well have
been locked?
Oh, yes.
You yourself did not happen to notice, madame, when you entered Mrs.
Inglethorp s room, whether that door was bolted or not?
I I believe it was.
But you did not see it?
No. I never looked.
But I did, interrupted Lawrence suddenly. I happened to notice
that it was bolted.
Ah, that settles it. And Poirot looked crestfallen.
I could not help rejoicing that, for once, one of his little ideas
had come to naught.
After lunch Poirot begged me to accompany him home. I consented rather
stiffly.
You are annoyed, is it not so? he asked anxiously, as we walked
through the park.
Not at all, I said coldly.
That is well. That lifts a great load from my mind.
This was not quite what I had intended. I had hoped that he would have
observed the stiffness of my manner. Still, the fervour of his words
went towards the appeasing of my just displeasure. I thawed.
I gave Lawrence your message, I said.
And what did he say? He was entirely puzzled?
Yes. I am quite sure he had no idea of what you meant.
I had expected Poirot to be disappointed; but, to my surprise, he
replied that that was as he had thought, and that he was very glad. My
pride forbade me to ask any questions.
Poirot switched off on another tack.
Mademoiselle Cynthia was not at lunch to day? How was that?
She is at the hospital again. She resumed work to day.
Ah, she is an industrious little demoiselle. And pretty too. She is
like pictures I have seen in Italy. I would rather like to see that
dispensary of hers. Do you think she would show it to me?
I am sure she would be delighted. It s an interesting little place.
Does she go there every day?
She has all Wednesdays off, and comes back to lunch on Saturdays.
Those are her only times off.
I will remember. Women are doing great work nowadays, and Mademoiselle
Cynthia is clever oh, yes, she has brains, that little one.
Yes. I believe she has passed quite a stiff exam.
Without doubt. After all, it is very responsible work. I suppose they
have very strong poisons there?
Yes, she showed them to us. They are kept locked up in a little
cupboard. I believe they have to be very careful. They always take out
the key before leaving the room.
Indeed. It is near the window, this cupboard?
No, right the other side of the room. Why?
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
I wondered. That is all. Will you come in?
We had reached the cottage.
No. I think I ll be getting back. I shall go round the long way
through the woods.
The woods round Styles were very beautiful. After the walk across the
open park, it was pleasant to saunter lazily through the cool glades.
There was hardly a breath of wind, the very chirp of the birds was
faint and subdued. I strolled on a little way, and finally flung myself
down at the foot of a grand old beech tree. My thoughts of mankind were
kindly and charitable. I even forgave Poirot for his absurd secrecy. In
fact, I was at peace with the world. Then I yawned.
I thought about the crime, and it struck me as being very unreal and
far off.
I yawned again.
Probably, I thought, it really never happened. Of course, it was all a
bad dream. The truth of the matter was that it was Lawrence who had
murdered Alfred Inglethorp with a croquet mallet. But it was absurd of
John to make such a fuss about it, and to go shouting out: I tell you
I won t have it!
I woke up with a start.
At once I realized that I was in a very awkward predicament. For, about
twelve feet away from me, John and Mary Cavendish were standing facing
each other, and they were evidently quarrelling. And, quite as
evidently, they were unaware of my vicinity, for before I could move or
speak John repeated the words which had aroused me from my dream.
I tell you, Mary, I won t have it.
Mary s voice came, cool and liquid:
Have you any right to criticize my actions?
It will be the talk of the village! My mother was only buried on
Saturday, and here you are gadding about with the fellow.
Oh, she shrugged her shoulders, if it is only village gossip that
you mind!
But it isn t. I ve had enough of the fellow hanging about. He s a
Polish Jew, anyway.
A tinge of Jewish blood is not a bad thing. It leavens the she looked
at him stolid stupidity of the ordinary Englishman.
Fire in her eyes, ice in her voice. I did not wonder that the blood
rose to John s face in a crimson tide.
Mary!
Well? Her tone did not change.
The pleading died out of his voice.
Am I to understand that you will continue to see Bauerstein against my
express wishes?
If I choose.
You defy me?
No, but I deny your right to criticize my actions. Have you no
friends of whom I should disapprove?
John fell back a pace. The colour ebbed slowly from his face.
What do you mean? he said, in an unsteady voice.
You see! said Mary quietly. You do see, don t you, that you have
no right to dictate to me as to the choice of my friends?
John glanced at her pleadingly, a stricken look on his face.
No right? Have I no right, Mary? he said unsteadily. He stretched
out his hands. Mary
For a moment, I thought she wavered. A softer expression came over her
face, then suddenly she turned almost fiercely away.
None!
She was walking away when John sprang after her, and caught her by the
arm.
Mary his voice was very quiet now are you in love with this fellow
Bauerstein?
She hesitated, and suddenly there swept across her face a strange
expression, old as the hills, yet with something eternally young about
it. So might some Egyptian sphinx have smiled.
She freed herself quietly from his arm, and spoke over her shoulder.
Perhaps, she said; and then swiftly passed out of the little glade,
leaving John standing there as though he had been turned to stone.
Rather ostentatiously, I stepped forward, crackling some dead branches
with my feet as I did so. John turned. Luckily, he took it for granted
that I had only just come upon the scene.
Hullo, Hastings. Have you seen the little fellow safely back to his
cottage? Quaint little chap! Is he any good, though, really?
He was considered one of the finest detectives of his day.
Oh, well, I suppose there must be something in it, then. What a rotten
world it is, though!
You find it so? I asked.
Good Lord, yes! There s this terrible business to start with. Scotland
Yard men in and out of the house like a jack in the box! Never know
where they won t turn up next. Screaming headlines in every paper in
the country damn all journalists, I say! Do you know there was a whole
crowd staring in at the lodge gates this morning. Sort of Madame
Tussaud s chamber of horrors business that can be seen for nothing.
Pretty thick, isn t it?
Cheer up, John! I said soothingly. It can t last for ever.
Can t it, though? It can last long enough for us never to be able to
hold up our heads again.
No, no, you re getting morbid on the subject.
Enough to make a man morbid, to be stalked by beastly journalists and
stared at by gaping moon faced idiots, wherever he goes! But there s
worse than that.
What?
John lowered his voice:
Have you ever thought, Hastings it s a nightmare to me who did it? I
can t help feeling sometimes it must have been an accident.
Because because who could have done it? Now Inglethorp s out of the
way, there s no one else; no one, I mean, except one of us.
Yes, indeed, that was nightmare enough for any man! One of us? Yes,
surely it must be so, unless
A new idea suggested itself to my mind. Rapidly, I considered it. The
light increased. Poirot s mysterious doings, his hints they all fitted
in. Fool that I was not to have thought of this possibility before, and
what a relief for us all.
No, John, I said, it isn t one of us. How could it be?
I know, but, still, who else is there?
Can t you guess?
No.
I looked cautiously round, and lowered my voice.
Dr. Bauerstein! I whispered.
Impossible!
Not at all.
But what earthly interest could he have in my mother s death?
That I don t see, I confessed, but I ll tell you this: Poirot thinks
so.
Poirot? Does he? How do you know?
I told him of Poirot s intense excitement on hearing that Dr.
Bauerstein had been at Styles on the fatal night, and added:
He said twice: That alters everything. And I ve been thinking. You
know Inglethorp said he had put down the coffee in the hall? Well, it
was just then that Bauerstein arrived. Isn t it possible that, as
Inglethorp brought him through the hall, the doctor dropped something
into the coffee in passing?
H m, said John. It would have been very risky.
Yes, but it was possible.
And then, how could he know it was her coffee? No, old fellow, I don t
think that will wash.
But I had remembered something else.
You re quite right. That wasn t how it was done. Listen. And I then
told him of the cocoa sample which Poirot had taken to be analysed.
John interrupted just as I had done.
But, look here, Bauerstein had had it analysed already?
Yes, yes, that s the point. I didn t see it either until now. Don t
you understand? Bauerstein had it analysed that s just it! If
Bauerstein s the murderer, nothing could be simpler than for him to
substitute some ordinary cocoa for his sample, and send that to be
tested. And of course they would find no strychnine! But no one would
dream of suspecting Bauerstein, or think of taking another
sample except Poirot, I added, with belated recognition.
Yes, but what about the bitter taste that cocoa won t disguise?
Well, we ve only his word for that. And there are other possibilities.
He s admittedly one of the world s greatest toxicologists
One of the world s greatest what? Say it again.
He knows more about poisons than almost anybody, I explained. Well,
my idea is, that perhaps he s found some way of making strychnine
tasteless. Or it may not have been strychnine at all, but some obscure
drug no one has ever heard of, which produces much the same symptoms.
H m, yes, that might be, said John. But look here, how could he have
got at the cocoa? That wasn t downstairs?
No, it wasn t, I admitted reluctantly.
And then, suddenly, a dreadful possibility flashed through my mind. I
hoped and prayed it would not occur to John also. I glanced sideways at
him. He was frowning perplexedly, and I drew a deep breath of relief,
for the terrible thought that had flashed across my mind was this: that
Dr. Bauerstein might have had an accomplice.
Yet surely it could not be! Surely no woman as beautiful as Mary
Cavendish could be a murderess. Yet beautiful women had been known to
poison.
And suddenly I remembered that first conversation at tea on the day of
my arrival, and the gleam in her eyes as she had said that poison was a
woman s weapon. How agitated she had been on that fatal Tuesday
evening! Had Mrs. Inglethorp discovered something between her and
Bauerstein, and threatened to tell her husband? Was it to stop that
denunciation that the crime had been committed?
Then I remembered that enigmatical conversation between Poirot and
Evelyn Howard. Was this what they had meant? Was this the monstrous
possibility that Evelyn had tried not to believe?
Yes, it all fitted in.
No wonder Miss Howard had suggested hushing it up. Now I understood
that unfinished sentence of hers: Emily herself And in my heart I
agreed with her. Would not Mrs. Inglethorp have preferred to go
unavenged rather than have such terrible dishonour fall upon the name
of Cavendish.
There s another thing, said John suddenly, and the unexpected sound
of his voice made me start guiltily. Something which makes me doubt if
what you say can be true.
What s that? I asked, thankful that he had gone away from the subject
of how the poison could have been introduced into the cocoa.
Why, the fact that Bauerstein demanded a post mortem. He needn t have
done so. Little Wilkins would have been quite content to let it go at
heart disease.
Yes, I said doubtfully. But we don t know. Perhaps he thought it
safer in the long run. Someone might have talked afterwards. Then the
Home Office might have ordered exhumation. The whole thing would have
come out, then, and he would have been in an awkward position, for no
one would have believed that a man of his reputation could have been
deceived into calling it heart disease.
Yes, that s possible, admitted John. Still, he added, I m blest if
I can see what his motive could have been.
I trembled.
Look here, I said, I may be altogether wrong. And, remember, all
this is in confidence.
Oh, of course that goes without saying.
We had walked, as we talked, and now we passed through the little gate
into the garden. Voices rose near at hand, for tea was spread out under
the sycamore tree, as it had been on the day of my arrival.
Cynthia was back from the hospital, and I placed my chair beside her,
and told her of Poirot s wish to visit the dispensary.
Of course! I d love him to see it. He d better come to tea there one
day. I must fix it up with him. He s such a dear little man! But he
is funny. He made me take the brooch out of my tie the other day, and
put it in again, because he said it wasn t straight.
I laughed.
It s quite a mania with him.
Yes, isn t it?
We were silent for a minute or two, and then, glancing in the direction
of Mary Cavendish, and dropping her voice, Cynthia said:
Mr. Hastings.
Yes?
After tea, I want to talk to you.
Her glance at Mary had set me thinking. I fancied that between these
two there existed very little sympathy. For the first time, it occurred
to me to wonder about the girl s future. Mrs. Inglethorp had made no
provisions of any kind for her, but I imagined that John and Mary would
probably insist on her making her home with them at any rate until the
end of the war. John, I knew, was very fond of her, and would be sorry
to let her go.
John, who had gone into the house, now reappeared. His good natured
face wore an unaccustomed frown of anger.
Confound those detectives! I can t think what they re after! They ve
been in every room in the house turning things inside out, and upside
down. It really is too bad! I suppose they took advantage of our all
being out. I shall go for that fellow Japp, when I next see him!
Lot of Paul Prys, grunted Miss Howard.
Lawrence opined that they had to make a show of doing something.
Mary Cavendish said nothing.
After tea, I invited Cynthia to come for a walk, and we sauntered off
into the woods together.
Well? I inquired, as soon as we were protected from prying eyes by
the leafy screen.
With a sigh, Cynthia flung herself down, and tossed off her hat. The
sunlight, piercing through the branches, turned the auburn of her hair
to quivering gold.
Mr. Hastings you are always so kind, and you know such a lot.
It struck me at this moment that Cynthia was really a very charming
girl! Much more charming than Mary, who never said things of that kind.
Well? I asked benignantly, as she hesitated.
I want to ask your advice. What shall I do?
Do?
Yes. You see, Aunt Emily always told me I should be provided for. I
suppose she forgot, or didn t think she was likely to die anyway, I am
not provided for! And I don t know what to do. Do you think I ought
to go away from here at once?
Good heavens, no! They don t want to part with you, I m sure.
Cynthia hesitated a moment, plucking up the grass with her tiny hands.
Then she said: Mrs. Cavendish does. She hates me.
Hates you? I cried, astonished.
Cynthia nodded.
Yes. I don t know why, but she can t bear me; and he can t, either.
There I know you re wrong, I said warmly. On the contrary, John is
very fond of you.
Oh, yes John . I meant Lawrence. Not, of course, that I care whether
Lawrence hates me or not. Still, it s rather horrid when no one loves
you, isn t it?
But they do, Cynthia dear, I said earnestly. I m sure you are
mistaken. Look, there is John and Miss Howard
Cynthia nodded rather gloomily. Yes, John likes me, I think, and of
course Evie, for all her gruff ways, wouldn t be unkind to a fly. But
Lawrence never speaks to me if he can help it, and Mary can hardly
bring herself to be civil to me. She wants Evie to stay on, is begging
her to, but she doesn t want me, and and I don t know what to do.
Suddenly the poor child burst out crying.
I don t know what possessed me. Her beauty, perhaps, as she sat there,
with the sunlight glinting down on her head; perhaps the sense of
relief at encountering someone who so obviously could have no
connection with the tragedy; perhaps honest pity for her youth and
loneliness. Anyway, I leant forward, and taking her little hand, I said
awkwardly:
Marry me, Cynthia.
Unwittingly, I had hit upon a sovereign remedy for her tears. She sat
up at once, drew her hand away, and said, with some asperity:
Don t be silly!
I was a little annoyed.
I m not being silly. I am asking you to do me the honour of becoming
my wife.
To my intense surprise, Cynthia burst out laughing, and called me a
funny dear.
It s perfectly sweet of you, she said, but you know you don t want
to!
Yes, I do. I ve got
Never mind what you ve got. You don t really want to and I don t
either.
Well, of course, that settles it, I said stiffly. But I don t see
anything to laugh at. There s nothing funny about a proposal.
No, indeed, said Cynthia. Somebody might accept you next time.
Good bye, you ve cheered me up very much.
And, with a final uncontrollable burst of merriment, she vanished
through the trees.
Thinking over the interview, it struck me as being profoundly
unsatisfactory.
It occurred to me suddenly that I would go down to the village, and
look up Bauerstein. Somebody ought to be keeping an eye on the fellow.
At the same time, it would be wise to allay any suspicions he might
have as to his being suspected. I remembered how Poirot had relied on
my diplomacy. Accordingly, I went to the little house with the
Apartments card inserted in the window, where I knew he lodged, and
tapped on the door.
An old woman came and opened it.
Good afternoon, I said pleasantly. Is Dr. Bauerstein in?
She stared at me.
Haven t you heard?
Heard what?
About him.
What about him?
He s took.
Took? Dead?
No, took by the perlice.
By the police! I gasped. Do you mean they ve arrested him?
Yes, that s it, and
I waited to hear no more, but tore up the village to find Poirot.
CHAPTER X. THE ARREST
To my extreme annoyance, Poirot was not in, and the old Belgian who
answered my knock informed me that he believed he had gone to London.
I was dumbfounded. What on earth could Poirot be doing in London! Was
it a sudden decision on his part, or had he already made up his mind
when he parted from me a few hours earlier?
I retraced my steps to Styles in some annoyance. With Poirot away, I
was uncertain how to act. Had he foreseen this arrest? Had he not, in
all probability, been the cause of it? Those questions I could not
resolve. But in the meantime what was I to do? Should I announce the
arrest openly at Styles, or not? Though I did not acknowledge it to
myself, the thought of Mary Cavendish was weighing on me. Would it not
be a terrible shock to her? For the moment, I set aside utterly any
suspicions of her. She could not be implicated otherwise I should have
heard some hint of it.
Of course, there was no possibility of being able permanently to
conceal Dr. Bauerstein s arrest from her. It would be announced in
every newspaper on the morrow. Still, I shrank from blurting it out. If
only Poirot had been accessible, I could have asked his advice. What
possessed him to go posting off to London in this unaccountable way?
In spite of myself, my opinion of his sagacity was immeasurably
heightened. I would never have dreamt of suspecting the doctor, had not
Poirot put it into my head. Yes, decidedly, the little man was clever.
After some reflecting, I decided to take John into my confidence, and
leave him to make the matter public or not, as he thought fit.
He gave vent to a prodigious whistle, as I imparted the news.
Great Scott! You were right, then. I couldn t believe it at the
time.
No, it is astonishing until you get used to the idea, and see how it
makes everything fit in. Now, what are we to do? Of course, it will be
generally known to morrow.
John reflected.
Never mind, he said at last, we won t say anything at present. There
is no need. As you say, it will be known soon enough.
But to my intense surprise, on getting down early the next morning, and
eagerly opening the newspapers, there was not a word about the arrest!
There was a column of mere padding about The Styles Poisoning Case,
but nothing further. It was rather inexplicable, but I supposed that,
for some reason or other, Japp wished to keep it out of the papers. It
worried me just a little, for it suggested the possibility that there
might be further arrests to come.
After breakfast, I decided to go down to the village, and see if Poirot
had returned yet; but, before I could start, a well known face blocked
one of the windows, and the well known voice said:
Bonjour, mon ami!
Poirot, I exclaimed, with relief, and seizing him by both hands, I
dragged him into the room. I was never so glad to see anyone. Listen,
I have said nothing to anybody but John. Is that right?
My friend, replied Poirot, I do not know what you are talking
about.
Dr. Bauerstein s arrest, of course, I answered impatiently.
Is Bauerstein arrested, then?
Did you not know it?
Not the least in the world. But, pausing a moment, he added: Still,
it does not surprise me. After all, we are only four miles from the
coast.
The coast? I asked, puzzled. What has that got to do with it?
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
Surely, it is obvious!
Not to me. No doubt I am very dense, but I cannot see what the
proximity of the coast has got to do with the murder of Mrs.
Inglethorp.
Nothing at all, of course, replied Poirot, smiling. But we were
speaking of the arrest of Dr. Bauerstein.
Well, he is arrested for the murder of Mrs. Inglethorp
What? cried Poirot, in apparently lively astonishment. Dr.
Bauerstein arrested for the murder of Mrs. Inglethorp?
Yes.
Impossible! That would be too good a farce! Who told you that, my
friend?
Well, no one exactly told me, I confessed. But he is arrested.
Oh, yes, very likely. But for espionage, mon ami .
Espionage? I gasped.
Precisely.
Not for poisoning Mrs. Inglethorp?
Not unless our friend Japp has taken leave of his senses, replied
Poirot placidly.
But but I thought you thought so too?
Poirot gave me one look, which conveyed a wondering pity, and his full
sense of the utter absurdity of such an idea.
Do you mean to say, I asked, slowly adapting myself to the new idea,
that Dr. Bauerstein is a spy?
Poirot nodded.
Have you never suspected it?
It never entered my head.
It did not strike you as peculiar that a famous London doctor should
bury himself in a little village like this, and should be in the habit
of walking about at all hours of the night, fully dressed?
No, I confessed, I never thought of such a thing.
He is, of course, a German by birth, said Poirot thoughtfully,
though he has practised so long in this country that nobody thinks of
him as anything but an Englishman. He was naturalized about fifteen
years ago. A very clever man a Jew, of course.
The blackguard! I cried indignantly.
Not at all. He is, on the contrary, a patriot. Think what he stands to
lose. I admire the man myself.
But I could not look at it in Poirot s philosophical way.
And this is the man with whom Mrs. Cavendish has been wandering about
all over the country! I cried indignantly.
Yes. I should fancy he had found her very useful, remarked Poirot.
So long as gossip busied itself in coupling their names together, any
other vagaries of the doctor s passed unobserved.
Then you think he never really cared for her? I asked eagerly rather
too eagerly, perhaps, under the circumstances.
That, of course, I cannot say, but shall I tell you my own private
opinion, Hastings?
Yes.
Well, it is this: that Mrs. Cavendish does not care, and never has
cared one little jot about Dr. Bauerstein!
Do you really think so? I could not disguise my pleasure.
I am quite sure of it. And I will tell you why.
Yes?
Because she cares for someone else, mon ami .
Oh! What did he mean? In spite of myself, an agreeable warmth spread
over me. I am not a vain man where women are concerned, but I
remembered certain evidences, too lightly thought of at the time,
perhaps, but which certainly seemed to indicate
My pleasing thoughts were interrupted by the sudden entrance of Miss
Howard. She glanced round hastily to make sure there was no one else in
the room, and quickly produced an old sheet of brown paper. This she
handed to Poirot, murmuring as she did so the cryptic words:
On top of the wardrobe. Then she hurriedly left the room.
Poirot unfolded the sheet of paper eagerly, and uttered an exclamation
of satisfaction. He spread it out on the table.
Come here, Hastings. Now tell me, what is that initial J. or L.?
It was a medium sized sheet of paper, rather dusty, as though it had
lain by for some time. But it was the label that was attracting
Poirot s attention. At the top, it bore the printed stamp of Messrs.
Parkson s, the well known theatrical costumiers, and it was addressed
to the debatable initial Cavendish, Esq., Styles Court, Styles St.
Mary, Essex.
It might be T., or it might be L., I said, after studying the thing
for a minute or two. It certainly isn t a J.
Good, replied Poirot, folding up the paper again. I, also, am of
your way of thinking. It is an L., depend upon it!
Where did it come from? I asked curiously. Is it important?
Moderately so. It confirms a surmise of mine. Having deduced its
existence, I set Miss Howard to search for it, and, as you see, she has
been successful.
What did she mean by On the top of the wardrobe ?
She meant, replied Poirot promptly, that she found it on top of a
wardrobe.
A funny place for a piece of brown paper, I mused.
Not at all. The top of a wardrobe is an excellent place for brown
paper and cardboard boxes. I have kept them there myself. Neatly
arranged, there is nothing to offend the eye.
Poirot, I asked earnestly, have you made up your mind about this
crime?
Yes that is to say, I believe I know how it was committed.
Ah!
Unfortunately, I have no proof beyond my surmise, unless With
sudden energy, he caught me by the arm, and whirled me down the hall,
calling out in French in his excitement: Mademoiselle Dorcas,
Mademoiselle Dorcas, un moment, s il vous pla t!
Dorcas, quite flurried by the noise, came hurrying out of the pantry.
My good Dorcas, I have an idea a little idea if it should prove
justified, what magnificent chance! Tell me, on Monday, not Tuesday,
Dorcas, but Monday, the day before the tragedy, did anything go wrong
with Mrs. Inglethorp s bell?
Dorcas looked very surprised.
Yes, sir, now you mention it, it did; though I don t know how you came
to hear of it. A mouse, or some such, must have nibbled the wire
through. The man came and put it right on Tuesday morning.
With a long drawn exclamation of ecstasy, Poirot led the way back to
the morning room.
See you, one should not ask for outside proof no, reason should be
enough. But the flesh is weak, it is consolation to find that one is on
the right track. Ah, my friend, I am like a giant refreshed. I run! I
leap!
And, in very truth, run and leap he did, gambolling wildly down the
stretch of lawn outside the long window.
What is your remarkable little friend doing? asked a voice behind me,
and I turned to find Mary Cavendish at my elbow. She smiled, and so did
I. What is it all about?
Really, I can t tell you. He asked Dorcas some question about a bell,
and appeared so delighted with her answer that he is capering about as
you see!
Mary laughed.
How ridiculous! He s going out of the gate. Isn t he coming back
to day?
I don t know. I ve given up trying to guess what he ll do next.
Is he quite mad, Mr. Hastings?
I honestly don t know. Sometimes, I feel sure he is as mad as a
hatter; and then, just as he is at his maddest, I find there is method
in his madness.
I see.
In spite of her laugh, Mary was looking thoughtful this morning. She
seemed grave, almost sad.
It occurred to me that it would be a good opportunity to tackle her on
the subject of Cynthia. I began rather tactfully, I thought, but I
had not gone far before she stopped me authoritatively.
You are an excellent advocate, I have no doubt, Mr. Hastings, but in
this case your talents are quite thrown away. Cynthia will run no risk
of encountering any unkindness from me.
I began to stammer feebly that I hoped she hadn t thought But again
she stopped me, and her words were so unexpected that they quite drove
Cynthia, and her troubles, out of my mind.
Mr. Hastings, she said, do you think I and my husband are happy
together?
I was considerably taken aback, and murmured something about it s not
being my business to think anything of the sort.
Well, she said quietly, whether it is your business or not, I will
tell you that we are not happy.
I said nothing, for I saw that she had not finished.
She began slowly, walking up and down the room, her head a little bent,
and that slim, supple figure of hers swaying gently as she walked. She
stopped suddenly, and looked up at me.
You don t know anything about me, do you? she asked. Where I come
from, who I was before I married John anything, in fact? Well, I will
tell you. I will make a father confessor of you. You are kind, I
think yes, I am sure you are kind.
Somehow, I was not quite as elated as I might have been. I remembered
that Cynthia had begun her confidences in much the same way. Besides, a
father confessor should be elderly, it is not at all the role for a
young man.
My father was English, said Mrs. Cavendish, but my mother was a
Russian.
Ah, I said, now I understand
Understand what?
A hint of something foreign different that there has always been about
you.
My mother was very beautiful, I believe. I don t know, because I never
saw her. She died when I was quite a little child. I believe there was
some tragedy connected with her death she took an overdose of some
sleeping draught by mistake. However that may be, my father was
broken hearted. Shortly afterwards, he went into the Consular Service.
Everywhere he went, I went with him. When I was twenty three, I had
been nearly all over the world. It was a splendid life I loved it.
There was a smile on her face, and her head was thrown back. She seemed
living in the memory of those old glad days.
Then my father died. He left me very badly off. I had to go and live
with some old aunts in Yorkshire. She shuddered. You will understand
me when I say that it was a deadly life for a girl brought up as I had
been. The narrowness, the deadly monotony of it, almost drove me mad.
She paused a minute, and added in a different tone: And then I met
John Cavendish.
Yes?
You can imagine that, from my aunts point of view, it was a very good
match for me. But I can honestly say it was not this fact which weighed
with me. No, he was simply a way of escape from the insufferable
monotony of my life.
I said nothing, and after a moment, she went on:
Don t misunderstand me. I was quite honest with him. I told him, what
was true, that I liked him very much, that I hoped to come to like him
more, but that I was not in any way what the world calls in love with
him. He declared that that satisfied him, and so we were married.
She waited a long time, a little frown had gathered on her forehead.
She seemed to be looking back earnestly into those past days.
I think I am sure he cared for me at first. But I suppose we were not
well matched. Almost at once, we drifted apart. He it is not a pleasing
thing for my pride, but it is the truth tired of me very soon. I must
have made some murmur of dissent, for she went on quickly: Oh, yes, he
did! Not that it matters now now that we ve come to the parting of the
ways.
What do you mean?
She answered quietly:
I mean that I am not going to remain at Styles.
You and John are not going to live here?
John may live here, but I shall not.
You are going to leave him?
Yes.
But why?
She paused a long time, and said at last:
Perhaps because I want to be free!
And, as she spoke, I had a sudden vision of broad spaces, virgin tracts
of forests, untrodden lands and a realization of what freedom would
mean to such a nature as Mary Cavendish. I seemed to see her for a
moment as she was, a proud wild creature, as untamed by civilization as
some shy bird of the hills. A little cry broke from her lips:
You don t know, you don t know, how this hateful place has been prison
to me!
I understand, I said, but but don t do anything rash.
Oh, rash! Her voice mocked at my prudence.
Then suddenly I said a thing I could have bitten out my tongue for:
You know that Dr. Bauerstein has been arrested?
An instant coldness passed like a mask over her face, blotting out all
expression.
John was so kind as to break that to me this morning.
Well, what do you think? I asked feebly.
Of what?
Of the arrest?
What should I think? Apparently he is a German spy; so the gardener
had told John.
Her face and voice were absolutely cold and expressionless. Did she
care, or did she not?
She moved away a step or two, and fingered one of the flower vases.
These are quite dead. I must do them again. Would you mind
moving thank you, Mr. Hastings. And she walked quietly past me out of
the window, with a cool little nod of dismissal.
No, surely she could not care for Bauerstein. No woman could act her
part with that icy unconcern.
Poirot did not make his appearance the following morning, and there was
no sign of the Scotland Yard men.
But, at lunch time, there arrived a new piece of evidence or rather
lack of evidence. We had vainly tried to trace the fourth letter, which
Mrs. Inglethorp had written on the evening preceding her death. Our
efforts having been in vain, we had abandoned the matter, hoping that
it might turn up of itself one day. And this is just what did happen,
in the shape of a communication, which arrived by the second post from
a firm of French music publishers, acknowledging Mrs. Inglethorp s
cheque, and regretting they had been unable to trace a certain series
of Russian folksongs. So the last hope of solving the mystery, by means
of Mrs. Inglethorp s correspondence on the fatal evening, had to be
abandoned.
Just before tea, I strolled down to tell Poirot of the new
disappointment, but found, to my annoyance, that he was once more out.
Gone to London again?
Oh, no, monsieur, he has but taken the train to Tadminster. To see a
young lady s dispensary, he said.
Silly ass! I ejaculated. I told him Wednesday was the one day she
wasn t there! Well, tell him to look us up to morrow morning, will
you?
Certainly, monsieur.
But, on the following day, no sign of Poirot. I was getting angry. He
was really treating us in the most cavalier fashion.
After lunch, Lawrence drew me aside, and asked if I was going down to
see him.
No, I don t think I shall. He can come up here if he wants to see us.
Oh! Lawrence looked indeterminate. Something unusually nervous and
excited in his manner roused my curiosity.
What is it? I asked. I could go if there s anything special.
It s nothing much, but well, if you are going, will you tell him he
dropped his voice to a whisper I think I ve found the extra
coffee cup!
I had almost forgotten that enigmatical message of Poirot s, but now my
curiosity was aroused afresh.
Lawrence would say no more, so I decided that I would descend from my
high horse, and once more seek out Poirot at Leastways Cottage.
This time I was received with a smile. Monsieur Poirot was within.
Would I mount? I mounted accordingly.
Poirot was sitting by the table, his head buried in his hands. He
sprang up at my entrance.
What is it? I asked solicitously. You are not ill, I trust?
No, no, not ill. But I decide an affair of great moment.
Whether to catch the criminal or not? I asked facetiously.
But, to my great surprise, Poirot nodded gravely.
To speak or not to speak, as your so great Shakespeare says, that
is the question.
I did not trouble to correct the quotation.
You are not serious, Poirot?
I am of the most serious. For the most serious of all things hangs in
the balance.
And that is?
A woman s happiness, mon ami , he said gravely.
I did not quite know what to say.
The moment has come, said Poirot thoughtfully, and I do not know
what to do. For, see you, it is a big stake for which I play. No one
but I, Hercule Poirot, would attempt it! And he tapped himself proudly
on the breast.
After pausing a few minutes respectfully, so as not to spoil his
effect, I gave him Lawrence s message.
Aha! he cried. So he has found the extra coffee cup. That is good.
He has more intelligence than would appear, this long faced Monsieur
Lawrence of yours!
I did not myself think very highly of Lawrence s intelligence; but I
forebore to contradict Poirot, and gently took him to task for
forgetting my instructions as to which were Cynthia s days off.
It is true. I have the head of a sieve. However, the other young lady
was most kind. She was sorry for my disappointment, and showed me
everything in the kindest way.
Oh, well, that s all right, then, and you must go to tea with Cynthia
another day.
I told him about the letter.
I am sorry for that, he said. I always had hopes of that letter. But
no, it was not to be. This affair must all be unravelled from within.
He tapped his forehead. These little grey cells. It is up to them as
you say over here. Then, suddenly, he asked: Are you a judge of
finger marks, my friend?
No, I said, rather surprised, I know that there are no two
finger marks alike, but that s as far as my science goes.
Exactly.
He unlocked a little drawer, and took out some photographs which he
laid on the table.
I have numbered them, 1, 2, 3. Will you describe them to me?
I studied the proofs attentively.
All greatly magnified, I see. No. 1, I should say, are a man s
finger prints; thumb and first finger. No. 2 are a lady s; they are
much smaller, and quite different in every way. No. 3 I paused for
some time there seem to be a lot of confused finger marks, but here,
very distinctly, are No. 1 s.
Overlapping the others?
Yes.
You recognize them beyond fail?
Oh, yes; they are identical.
Poirot nodded, and gently taking the photographs from me locked them up
again.
I suppose, I said, that as usual, you are not going to explain?
On the contrary. No. 1 were the finger prints of Monsieur Lawrence.
No. 2 were those of Mademoiselle Cynthia. They are not important. I
merely obtained them for comparison. No. 3 is a little more
complicated.
Yes?
It is, as you see, highly magnified. You may have noticed a sort of
blur extending all across the picture. I will not describe to you the
special apparatus, dusting powder, etc., which I used. It is a
well known process to the police, and by means of it you can obtain a
photograph of the finger prints of any object in a very short space of
time. Well, my friend, you have seen the finger marks it remains to
tell you the particular object on which they had been left.
Go on I am really excited.
Eh bien! Photo No. 3 represents the highly magnified surface of a
tiny bottle in the top poison cupboard of the dispensary in the Red
Cross Hospital at Tadminster which sounds like the house that Jack
built!
Good heavens! I exclaimed. But what were Lawrence Cavendish s
finger marks doing on it? He never went near the poison cupboard the
day we were there!
Oh, yes, he did!
Impossible! We were all together the whole time.
Poirot shook his head.
No, my friend, there was a moment when you were not all together.
There was a moment when you could not have been all together, or it
would not have been necessary to call to Monsieur Lawrence to come and
join you on the balcony.
I d forgotten that, I admitted. But it was only for a moment.
Long enough.
Long enough for what?
Poirot s smile became rather enigmatical.
Long enough for a gentleman who had once studied medicine to gratify a
very natural interest and curiosity.
Our eyes met. Poirot s were pleasantly vague. He got up and hummed a
little tune. I watched him suspiciously.
Poirot, I said, what was in this particular little bottle?
Poirot looked out of the window.
Hydro chloride of strychnine, he said, over his shoulder, continuing
to hum.
Good heavens! I said it quite quietly. I was not surprised. I had
expected that answer.
They use the pure hydro chloride of strychnine very little only
occasionally for pills. It is the official solution, Liq. Strychnine
Hydro clor. that is used in most medicines. That is why the
finger marks have remained undisturbed since then.
How did you manage to take this photograph?
I dropped my hat from the balcony, explained Poirot simply. Visitors
were not permitted below at that hour, so, in spite of my many
apologies, Mademoiselle Cynthia s colleague had to go down and fetch it
for me.
Then you knew what you were going to find?
No, not at all. I merely realized that it was possible, from your
story, for Monsieur Lawrence to go to the poison cupboard. The
possibility had to be confirmed, or eliminated.
Poirot, I said, your gaiety does not deceive me. This is a very
important discovery.
I do not know, said Poirot. But one thing does strike me. No doubt
it has struck you too.
What is that?
Why, that there is altogether too much strychnine about this case.
This is the third time we run up against it. There was strychnine in
Mrs. Inglethorp s tonic. There is the strychnine sold across the
counter at Styles St. Mary by Mace. Now we have more strychnine,
handled by one of the household. It is confusing; and, as you know, I
do not like confusion.
Before I could reply, one of the other Belgians opened the door and
stuck his head in.
There is a lady below, asking for Mr Hastings.
A lady?
I jumped up. Poirot followed me down the narrow stairs. Mary Cavendish
was standing in the doorway.
I have been visiting an old woman in the village, she explained, and
as Lawrence told me you were with Monsieur Poirot I thought I would
call for you.
Alas, madame, said Poirot, I thought you had come to honour me with
a visit!
I will some day, if you ask me, she promised him, smiling.
That is well. If you should need a father confessor, madame she
started ever so slightly remember, Papa Poirot is always at your
service.
She stared at him for a few minutes, as though seeking to read some
deeper meaning into his words. Then she turned abruptly away.
Come, will you not walk back with us too, Monsieur Poirot?
Enchanted, madame.
All the way to Styles, Mary talked fast and feverishly. It struck me
that in some way she was nervous of Poirot s eyes.
The weather had broken, and the sharp wind was almost autumnal in its
shrewishness. Mary shivered a little, and buttoned her black sports
coat closer. The wind through the trees made a mournful noise, like
some great giant sighing.
We walked up to the great door of Styles, and at once the knowledge
came to us that something was wrong.
Dorcas came running out to meet us. She was crying and wringing her
hands. I was aware of other servants huddled together in the
background, all eyes and ears.
Oh, m am! Oh, m am! I don t know how to tell you
What is it, Dorcas? I asked impatiently. Tell us at once.
It s those wicked detectives. They ve arrested him they ve arrested
Mr. Cavendish!
Arrested Lawrence? I gasped.
I saw a strange look come into Dorcas s eyes.
No, sir. Not Mr. Lawrence Mr. John.
Behind me, with a wild cry, Mary Cavendish fell heavily against me, and
as I turned to catch her I met the quiet triumph in Poirot s eyes.
CHAPTER XI. THE CASE FOR THE PROSECUTION
The trial of John Cavendish for the murder of his stepmother took place
two months later.
Of the intervening weeks I will say little, but my admiration and
sympathy went out unfeignedly to Mary Cavendish. She ranged herself
passionately on her husband s side, scorning the mere idea of his
guilt, and fought for him tooth and nail.
I expressed my admiration to Poirot, and he nodded thoughtfully.
Yes, she is of those women who show at their best in adversity. It
brings out all that is sweetest and truest in them. Her pride and her
jealousy have
Jealousy? I queried.
Yes. Have you not realized that she is an unusually jealous woman? As
I was saying, her pride and jealousy have been laid aside. She thinks
of nothing but her husband, and the terrible fate that is hanging over
him.
He spoke very feelingly, and I looked at him earnestly, remembering
that last afternoon, when he had been deliberating whether or not to
speak. With his tenderness for a woman s happiness, I felt glad that
the decision had been taken out of his hands.
Even now, I said, I can hardly believe it. You see, up to the very
last minute, I thought it was Lawrence!
Poirot grinned.
I know you did.
But John! My old friend John!
Every murderer is probably somebody s old friend, observed Poirot
philosophically. You cannot mix up sentiment and reason.
I must say I think you might have given me a hint.
Perhaps, mon ami , I did not do so, just because he was your old
friend.
I was rather disconcerted by this, remembering how I had busily passed
on to John what I believed to be Poirot s views concerning Bauerstein.
He, by the way, had been acquitted of the charge brought against him.
Nevertheless, although he had been too clever for them this time, and
the charge of espionage could not be brought home to him, his wings
were pretty well clipped for the future.
I asked Poirot whether he thought John would be condemned. To my
intense surprise, he replied that, on the contrary, he was extremely
likely to be acquitted.
But, Poirot I protested.
Oh, my friend, have I not said to you all along that I have no proofs.
It is one thing to know that a man is guilty, it is quite another
matter to prove him so. And, in this case, there is terribly little
evidence. That is the whole trouble. I, Hercule Poirot, know, but I
lack the last link in my chain. And unless I can find that missing
link He shook his head gravely.
When did you first suspect John Cavendish? I asked, after a minute or
two.
Did you not suspect him at all?
No, indeed.
Not after that fragment of conversation you overheard between Mrs.
Cavendish and her mother in law, and her subsequent lack of frankness
at the inquest?
No.
Did you not put two and two together, and reflect that if it was not
Alfred Inglethorp who was quarrelling with his wife and you remember,
he strenuously denied it at the inquest it must be either Lawrence or
John. Now, if it was Lawrence, Mary Cavendish s conduct was just as
inexplicable. But if, on the other hand, it was John, the whole thing
was explained quite naturally.
So, I cried, a light breaking in upon me, it was John who quarrelled
with his mother that afternoon?
Exactly.
And you have known this all along?
Certainly. Mrs. Cavendish s behaviour could only be explained that
way.
And yet you say he may be acquitted?
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
Certainly I do. At the police court proceedings, we shall hear the
case for the prosecution, but in all probability his solicitors will
advise him to reserve his defence. That will be sprung upon us at the
trial. And ah, by the way, I have a word of caution to give you, my
friend. I must not appear in the case.
What?
No. Officially, I have nothing to do with it. Until I have found that
last link in my chain, I must remain behind the scenes. Mrs. Cavendish
must think I am working for her husband, not against him.
I say, that s playing it a bit low down, I protested.
Not at all. We have to deal with a most clever and unscrupulous man,
and we must use any means in our power otherwise he will slip through
our fingers. That is why I have been careful to remain in the
background. All the discoveries have been made by Japp, and Japp will
take all the credit. If I am called upon to give evidence at all he
smiled broadly it will probably be as a witness for the defence.
I could hardly believe my ears.
It is quite en r gle , continued Poirot. Strangely enough, I can
give evidence that will demolish one contention of the prosecution.
Which one?
The one that relates to the destruction of the will. John Cavendish
did not destroy that will.
Poirot was a true prophet. I will not go into the details of the police
court proceedings, as it involves many tiresome repetitions. I will
merely state baldly that John Cavendish reserved his defence, and was
duly committed for trial.
September found us all in London. Mary took a house in Kensington,
Poirot being included in the family party.
I myself had been given a job at the War Office, so was able to see
them continually.
As the weeks went by, the state of Poirot s nerves grew worse and
worse. That last link he talked about was still lacking. Privately, I
hoped it might remain so, for what happiness could there be for Mary,
if John were not acquitted?
On September 15th John Cavendish appeared in the dock at the Old
Bailey, charged with The Wilful Murder of Emily Agnes Inglethorp, and
pleaded Not Guilty.
Sir Ernest Heavywether, the famous K.C., had been engaged to defend
him.
Mr. Philips, K.C., opened the case for the Crown.
The murder, he said, was a most premeditated and cold blooded one. It
was neither more nor less than the deliberate poisoning of a fond and
trusting woman by the stepson to whom she had been more than a mother.
Ever since his boyhood, she had supported him. He and his wife had
lived at Styles Court in every luxury, surrounded by her care and
attention. She had been their kind and generous benefactress.
He proposed to call witnesses to show how the prisoner, a profligate
and spendthrift, had been at the end of his financial tether, and had
also been carrying on an intrigue with a certain Mrs. Raikes, a
neighbouring farmer s wife. This having come to his stepmother s ears,
she taxed him with it on the afternoon before her death, and a quarrel
ensued, part of which was overheard. On the previous day, the prisoner
had purchased strychnine at the village chemist s shop, wearing a
disguise by means of which he hoped to throw the onus of the crime upon
another man to wit, Mrs. Inglethorp s husband, of whom he had been
bitterly jealous. Luckily for Mr. Inglethorp, he had been able to
produce an unimpeachable alibi.
On the afternoon of July 17th, continued Counsel, immediately after the
quarrel with her son, Mrs. Inglethorp made a new will. This will was
found destroyed in the grate of her bedroom the following morning, but
evidence had come to light which showed that it had been drawn up in
favour of her husband. Deceased had already made a will in his favour
before her marriage, but and Mr. Philips wagged an expressive
forefinger the prisoner was not aware of that. What had induced the
deceased to make a fresh will, with the old one still extant, he could
not say. She was an old lady, and might possibly have forgotten the
former one; or this seemed to him more likely she may have had an idea
that it was revoked by her marriage, as there had been some
conversation on the subject. Ladies were not always very well versed in
legal knowledge. She had, about a year before, executed a will in
favour of the prisoner. He would call evidence to show that it was the
prisoner who ultimately handed his stepmother her coffee on the fatal
night. Later in the evening, he had sought admission to her room, on
which occasion, no doubt, he found an opportunity of destroying the
will which, as far as he knew, would render the one in his favour
valid.
The prisoner had been arrested in consequence of the discovery, in his
room, by Detective Inspector Japp a most brilliant officer of the
identical phial of strychnine which had been sold at the village
chemist s to the supposed Mr. Inglethorp on the day before the murder.
It would be for the jury to decide whether or not these damning facts
constituted an overwhelming proof of the prisoner s guilt.
And, subtly implying that a jury which did not so decide, was quite
unthinkable, Mr. Philips sat down and wiped his forehead.
The first witnesses for the prosecution were mostly those who had been
called at the inquest, the medical evidence being again taken first.
Sir Ernest Heavywether, who was famous all over England for the
unscrupulous manner in which he bullied witnesses, only asked two
questions.
I take it, Dr. Bauerstein, that strychnine, as a drug, acts quickly?
Yes.
And that you are unable to account for the delay in this case?
Yes.
Thank you.
Mr. Mace identified the phial handed him by Counsel as that sold by him
to Mr. Inglethorp. Pressed, he admitted that he only knew Mr.
Inglethorp by sight. He had never spoken to him. The witness was not
cross examined.
Alfred Inglethorp was called, and denied having purchased the poison.
He also denied having quarrelled with his wife. Various witnesses
testified to the accuracy of these statements.
The gardeners evidence, as to the witnessing of the will was taken,
and then Dorcas was called.
Dorcas, faithful to her young gentlemen, denied strenuously that it
could have been John s voice she heard, and resolutely declared, in the
teeth of everything, that it was Mr. Inglethorp who had been in the
boudoir with her mistress. A rather wistful smile passed across the
face of the prisoner in the dock. He knew only too well how useless her
gallant defiance was, since it was not the object of the defence to
deny this point. Mrs. Cavendish, of course, could not be called upon to
give evidence against her husband.
After various questions on other matters, Mr. Philips asked:
In the month of June last, do you remember a parcel arriving for Mr.
Lawrence Cavendish from Parkson s?
Dorcas shook her head.
I don t remember, sir. It may have done, but Mr. Lawrence was away
from home part of June.
In the event of a parcel arriving for him whilst he was away, what
would be done with it?
It would either be put in his room or sent on after him.
By you?
No, sir, I should leave it on the hall table. It would be Miss Howard
who would attend to anything like that.
Evelyn Howard was called and, after being examined on other points, was
questioned as to the parcel.
Don t remember. Lots of parcels come. Can t remember one special one.
You do not know if it was sent after Mr. Lawrence Cavendish to Wales,
or whether it was put in his room?
Don t think it was sent after him. Should have remembered it if it
was.
Supposing a parcel arrived addressed to Mr. Lawrence Cavendish, and
afterwards it disappeared, should you remark its absence?
No, don t think so. I should think someone had taken charge of it.
I believe, Miss Howard, that it was you who found this sheet of brown
paper? He held up the same dusty piece which Poirot and I had examined
in the morning room at Styles.
Yes, I did.
How did you come to look for it?
The Belgian detective who was employed on the case asked me to search
for it.
Where did you eventually discover it?
On the top of of a wardrobe.
On top of the prisoner s wardrobe?
I I believe so.
Did you not find it yourself?
Yes.
Then you must know where you found it?
Yes, it was on the prisoner s wardrobe.
That is better.
An assistant from Parkson s, Theatrical Costumiers, testified that on
June 29th, they had supplied a black beard to Mr. L. Cavendish, as
requested. It was ordered by letter, and a postal order was enclosed.
No, they had not kept the letter. All transactions were entered in
their books. They had sent the beard, as directed, to L. Cavendish,
Esq., Styles Court.
Sir Ernest Heavywether rose ponderously.
Where was the letter written from?
From Styles Court.
The same address to which you sent the parcel?
Yes.
And the letter came from there?
Yes.
Like a beast of prey, Heavywether fell upon him:
How do you know?
I I don t understand.
How do you know that letter came from Styles? Did you notice the
postmark?
No but
Ah, you did not notice the postmark! And yet you affirm so
confidently that it came from Styles. It might, in fact, have been any
postmark?
Y es.
In fact, the letter, though written on stamped notepaper, might have
been posted from anywhere? From Wales, for instance?
The witness admitted that such might be the case, and Sir Ernest
signified that he was satisfied.
Elizabeth Wells, second housemaid at Styles, stated that after she had
gone to bed she remembered that she had bolted the front door, instead
of leaving it on the latch as Mr. Inglethorp had requested. She had
accordingly gone downstairs again to rectify her error. Hearing a
slight noise in the West wing, she had peeped along the passage, and
had seen Mr. John Cavendish knocking at Mrs. Inglethorp s door.
Sir Ernest Heavywether made short work of her, and under his unmerciful
bullying she contradicted herself hopelessly, and Sir Ernest sat down
again with a satisfied smile on his face.
With the evidence of Annie, as to the candle grease on the floor, and
as to seeing the prisoner take the coffee into the boudoir, the
proceedings were adjourned until the following day.
As we went home, Mary Cavendish spoke bitterly against the prosecuting
counsel.
That hateful man! What a net he has drawn around my poor John! How he
twisted every little fact until he made it seem what it wasn t!
Well, I said consolingly, it will be the other way about to morrow.
Yes, she said meditatively; then suddenly dropped her voice. Mr.
Hastings, you do not think surely it could not have been Lawrence Oh,
no, that could not be!
But I myself was puzzled, and as soon as I was alone with Poirot I
asked him what he thought Sir Ernest was driving at.
Ah! said Poirot appreciatively. He is a clever man, that Sir
Ernest.
Do you think he believes Lawrence guilty?
I do not think he believes or cares anything! No, what he is trying
for is to create such confusion in the minds of the jury that they are
divided in their opinion as to which brother did it. He is endeavouring
to make out that there is quite as much evidence against Lawrence as
against John and I am not at all sure that he will not succeed.
Detective inspector Japp was the first witness called when the trial
was reopened, and gave his evidence succinctly and briefly. After
relating the earlier events, he proceeded:
Acting on information received, Superintendent Summerhaye and myself
searched the prisoner s room, during his temporary absence from the
house. In his chest of drawers, hidden beneath some underclothing, we
found: first, a pair of gold rimmed pince nez similar to those worn by
Mr. Inglethorp these were exhibited secondly, this phial.
The phial was that already recognized by the chemist s assistant, a
tiny bottle of blue glass, containing a few grains of a white
crystalline powder, and labelled: Strychnine Hydro chloride. POISON.
A fresh piece of evidence discovered by the detectives since the police
court proceedings was a long, almost new piece of blotting paper. It
had been found in Mrs. Inglethorp s cheque book, and on being reversed
at a mirror, showed clearly the words: . . . erything of which I die
possessed I leave to my beloved husband Alfred Ing... This placed
beyond question the fact that the destroyed will had been in favour of
the deceased lady s husband. Japp then produced the charred fragment of
paper recovered from the grate, and this, with the discovery of the
beard in the attic, completed his evidence.
But Sir Ernest s cross examination was yet to come.
What day was it when you searched the prisoner s room?
Tuesday, the 24th of July.
Exactly a week after the tragedy?
Yes.
You found these two objects, you say, in the chest of drawers. Was the
drawer unlocked?
Yes.
Does it not strike you as unlikely that a man who had committed a
crime should keep the evidence of it in an unlocked drawer for anyone
to find?
He might have stowed them there in a hurry.
But you have just said it was a whole week since the crime. He would
have had ample time to remove them and destroy them.
Perhaps.
There is no perhaps about it. Would he, or would he not have had
plenty of time to remove and destroy them?
Yes.
Was the pile of underclothes under which the things were hidden heavy
or light?
Heavyish.
In other words, it was winter underclothing. Obviously, the prisoner
would not be likely to go to that drawer?
Perhaps not.
Kindly answer my question. Would the prisoner, in the hottest week of
a hot summer, be likely to go to a drawer containing winter
underclothing. Yes, or no?
No.
In that case, is it not possible that the articles in question might
have been put there by a third person, and that the prisoner was quite
unaware of their presence?
I should not think it likely.
But it is possible?
Yes.
That is all.
More evidence followed. Evidence as to the financial difficulties in
which the prisoner had found himself at the end of July. Evidence as to
his intrigue with Mrs. Raikes poor Mary, that must have been bitter
hearing for a woman of her pride. Evelyn Howard had been right in her
facts, though her animosity against Alfred Inglethorp had caused her to
jump to the conclusion that he was the person concerned.
Lawrence Cavendish was then put into the box. In a low voice, in answer
to Mr. Philips questions, he denied having ordered anything from
Parkson s in June. In fact, on June 29th, he had been staying away, in
Wales.
Instantly, Sir Ernest s chin was shooting pugnaciously forward.
You deny having ordered a black beard from Parkson s on June 29th?
I do.
Ah! In the event of anything happening to your brother, who will
inherit Styles Court?
The brutality of the question called a flush to Lawrence s pale face.
The judge gave vent to a faint murmur of disapprobation, and the
prisoner in the dock leant forward angrily.
Heavywether cared nothing for his client s anger.
Answer my question, if you please.
I suppose, said Lawrence quietly, that I should.
What do you mean by you suppose ? Your brother has no children. You
would inherit it, wouldn t you?
Yes.
Ah, that s better, said Heavywether, with ferocious geniality. And
you d inherit a good slice of money too, wouldn t you?
Really, Sir Ernest, protested the judge, these questions are not
relevant.
Sir Ernest bowed, and having shot his arrow proceeded.
On Tuesday, the 17th July, you went, I believe, with another guest, to
visit the dispensary at the Red Cross Hospital in Tadminster?
Yes.
Did you while you happened to be alone for a few seconds unlock the
poison cupboard, and examine some of the bottles?
I I may have done so.
I put it to you that you did do so?
Yes.
Sir Ernest fairly shot the next question at him.
Did you examine one bottle in particular?
No, I do not think so.
Be careful, Mr. Cavendish. I am referring to a little bottle of
Hydro chloride of Strychnine.
Lawrence was turning a sickly greenish colour.
N o I am sure I didn t.
Then how do you account for the fact that you left the unmistakable
impress of your finger prints on it?
The bullying manner was highly efficacious with a nervous disposition.
I I suppose I must have taken up the bottle.
I suppose so too! Did you abstract any of the contents of the bottle?
Certainly not.
Then why did you take it up?
I once studied to be a doctor. Such things naturally interest me.
Ah! So poisons naturally interest you, do they? Still, you waited to
be alone before gratifying that interest of yours?
That was pure chance. If the others had been there, I should have done
just the same.
Still, as it happens, the others were not there?
No, but
In fact, during the whole afternoon, you were only alone for a couple
of minutes, and it happened I say, it happened to be during those two
minutes that you displayed your natural interest in Hydro chloride of
Strychnine?
Lawrence stammered pitiably.
I I
With a satisfied and expressive countenance, Sir Ernest observed:
I have nothing more to ask you, Mr. Cavendish.
This bit of cross examination had caused great excitement in court. The
heads of the many fashionably attired women present were busily laid
together, and their whispers became so loud that the judge angrily
threatened to have the court cleared if there was not immediate
silence.
There was little more evidence. The hand writing experts were called
upon for their opinion of the signature of Alfred Inglethorp in the
chemist s poison register. They all declared unanimously that it was
certainly not his hand writing, and gave it as their view that it might
be that of the prisoner disguised. Cross examined, they admitted that
it might be the prisoner s hand writing cleverly counterfeited.
Sir Ernest Heavywether s speech in opening the case for the defence was
not a long one, but it was backed by the full force of his emphatic
manner. Never, he said, in the course of his long experience, had he
known a charge of murder rest on slighter evidence. Not only was it
entirely circumstantial, but the greater part of it was practically
unproved. Let them take the testimony they had heard and sift it
impartially. The strychnine had been found in a drawer in the
prisoner s room. That drawer was an unlocked one, as he had pointed
out, and he submitted that there was no evidence to prove that it was
the prisoner who had concealed the poison there. It was, in fact, a
wicked and malicious attempt on the part of some third person to fix
the crime on the prisoner. The prosecution had been unable to produce a
shred of evidence in support of their contention that it was the
prisoner who ordered the black beard from Parkson s. The quarrel which
had taken place between prisoner and his stepmother was freely
admitted, but both it and his financial embarrassments had been grossly
exaggerated.
His learned friend Sir Ernest nodded carelessly at Mr. Philips had
stated that if the prisoner were an innocent man, he would have come
forward at the inquest to explain that it was he, and not Mr.
Inglethorp, who had been the participator in the quarrel. He thought
the facts had been misrepresented. What had actually occurred was this.
The prisoner, returning to the house on Tuesday evening, had been
authoritatively told that there had been a violent quarrel between Mr.
and Mrs. Inglethorp. No suspicion had entered the prisoner s head that
anyone could possibly have mistaken his voice for that of Mr.
Inglethorp. He naturally concluded that his stepmother had had two
quarrels.
The prosecution averred that on Monday, July 16th, the prisoner had
entered the chemist s shop in the village, disguised as Mr. Inglethorp.
The prisoner, on the contrary, was at that time at a lonely spot called
Marston s Spinney, where he had been summoned by an anonymous note,
couched in blackmailing terms, and threatening to reveal certain
matters to his wife unless he complied with its demands. The prisoner
had, accordingly, gone to the appointed spot, and after waiting there
vainly for half an hour had returned home. Unfortunately, he had met
with no one on the way there or back who could vouch for the truth of
his story, but luckily he had kept the note, and it would be produced
as evidence.
As for the statement relating to the destruction of the will, the
prisoner had formerly practised at the Bar, and was perfectly well
aware that the will made in his favour a year before was automatically
revoked by his stepmother s remarriage. He would call evidence to show
who did destroy the will, and it was possible that that might open up
quite a new view of the case.
Finally, he would point out to the jury that there was evidence against
other people besides John Cavendish. He would direct their attention to
the fact that the evidence against Mr. Lawrence Cavendish was quite as
strong, if not stronger than that against his brother.
He would now call the prisoner.
John acquitted himself well in the witness box. Under Sir Ernest s
skilful handling, he told his tale credibly and well. The anonymous
note received by him was produced, and handed to the jury to examine.
The readiness with which he admitted his financial difficulties, and
the disagreement with his stepmother, lent value to his denials.
At the close of his examination, he paused, and said:
I should like to make one thing clear. I utterly reject and disapprove
of Sir Ernest Heavywether s insinuations against my brother. My
brother, I am convinced, had no more to do with the crime than I have.
Sir Ernest merely smiled, and noted with a sharp eye that John s
protest had produced a very favourable impression on the jury.
Then the cross examination began.
I understand you to say that it never entered your head that the
witnesses at the inquest could possibly have mistaken your voice for
that of Mr. Inglethorp. Is not that very surprising?
No, I don t think so. I was told there had been a quarrel between my
mother and Mr. Inglethorp, and it never occurred to me that such was
not really the case.
Not when the servant Dorcas repeated certain fragments of the
conversation fragments which you must have recognized?
I did not recognize them.
Your memory must be unusually short!
No, but we were both angry, and, I think, said more than we meant. I
paid very little attention to my mother s actual words.
Mr. Philips incredulous sniff was a triumph of forensic skill. He
passed on to the subject of the note.
You have produced this note very opportunely. Tell me, is there
nothing familiar about the hand writing of it?
Not that I know of.
Do you not think that it bears a marked resemblance to your own
hand writing carelessly disguised?
No, I do not think so.
I put it to you that it is your own hand writing!
No.
I put it to you that, anxious to prove an alibi, you conceived the
idea of a fictitious and rather incredible appointment, and wrote this
note yourself in order to bear out your statement!
No.
Is it not a fact that, at the time you claim to have been waiting
about at a solitary and unfrequented spot, you were really in the
chemist s shop in Styles St. Mary, where you purchased strychnine in
the name of Alfred Inglethorp?
No, that is a lie.
I put it to you that, wearing a suit of Mr. Inglethorp s clothes, with
a black beard trimmed to resemble his, you were there and signed the
register in his name!
That is absolutely untrue.
Then I will leave the remarkable similarity of hand writing between
the note, the register, and your own, to the consideration of the
jury, said Mr. Philips, and sat down with the air of a man who has
done his duty, but who was nevertheless horrified by such deliberate
perjury.
After this, as it was growing late, the case was adjourned till Monday.
Poirot, I noticed, was looking profoundly discouraged. He had that
little frown between the eyes that I knew so well.
What is it, Poirot? I inquired.
Ah, mon ami , things are going badly, badly.
In spite of myself, my heart gave a leap of relief. Evidently there was
a likelihood of John Cavendish being acquitted.
When we reached the house, my little friend waved aside Mary s offer of
tea.
No, I thank you, madame. I will mount to my room.
I followed him. Still frowning, he went across to the desk and took out
a small pack of patience cards. Then he drew up a chair to the table,
and, to my utter amazement, began solemnly to build card houses!
My jaw dropped involuntarily, and he said at once:
No, mon ami , I am not in my second childhood! I steady my nerves,
that is all. This employment requires precision of the fingers. With
precision of the fingers goes precision of the brain. And never have I
needed that more than now!
What is the trouble? I asked.
With a great thump on the table, Poirot demolished his carefully built
up edifice.
It is this, mon ami! That I can build card houses seven stories
high, but I cannot thump find thump that last link of which I
spoke to you.
I could not quite tell what to say, so I held my peace, and he began
slowly building up the cards again, speaking in jerks as he did so.
It is done so! By placing one card on another with
mathematical precision!
I watched the card house rising under his hands, story by story. He
never hesitated or faltered. It was really almost like a conjuring
trick.
What a steady hand you ve got, I remarked. I believe I ve only seen
your hand shake once.
On an occasion when I was enraged, without doubt, observed Poirot,
with great placidity.
Yes indeed! You were in a towering rage. Do you remember? It was when
you discovered that the lock of the despatch case in Mrs. Inglethorp s
bedroom had been forced. You stood by the mantelpiece, twiddling the
things on it in your usual fashion, and your hand shook like a leaf! I
must say
But I stopped suddenly. For Poirot, uttering a hoarse and inarticulate
cry, again annihilated his masterpiece of cards, and putting his hands
over his eyes swayed backwards and forwards, apparently suffering the
keenest agony.
Good heavens, Poirot! I cried. What is the matter? Are you taken
ill?
No, no, he gasped. It is it is that I have an idea!
Oh! I exclaimed, much relieved. One of your little ideas ?
Ah, ma foi , no! replied Poirot frankly. This time it is an idea
gigantic! Stupendous! And you you , my friend, have given it to me!
Suddenly clasping me in his arms, he kissed me warmly on both cheeks,
and before I had recovered from my surprise ran headlong from the room.
Mary Cavendish entered at that moment.
What is the matter with Monsieur Poirot? He rushed past me crying
out: A garage! For the love of Heaven, direct me to a garage, madame!
And, before I could answer, he had dashed out into the street.
I hurried to the window. True enough, there he was, tearing down the
street, hatless, and gesticulating as he went. I turned to Mary with a
gesture of despair.
He ll be stopped by a policeman in another minute. There he goes,
round the corner!
Our eyes met, and we stared helplessly at one another.
What can be the matter?
I shook my head.
I don t know. He was building card houses, when suddenly he said he
had an idea, and rushed off as you saw.
Well, said Mary, I expect he will be back before dinner.
But night fell, and Poirot had not returned.
CHAPTER XII. THE LAST LINK
Poirot s abrupt departure had intrigued us all greatly. Sunday morning
wore away, and still he did not reappear. But about three o clock a
ferocious and prolonged hooting outside drove us to the window, to see
Poirot alighting from a car, accompanied by Japp and Summerhaye. The
little man was transformed. He radiated an absurd complacency. He bowed
with exaggerated respect to Mary Cavendish.
Madame, I have your permission to hold a little r union in the
salon ? It is necessary for everyone to attend.
Mary smiled sadly.
You know, Monsieur Poirot, that you have carte blanche in every
way.
You are too amiable, madame.
Still beaming, Poirot marshalled us all into the drawing room, bringing
forward chairs as he did so.
Miss Howard here. Mademoiselle Cynthia. Monsieur Lawrence. The good
Dorcas. And Annie. Bien! We must delay our proceedings a few minutes
until Mr. Inglethorp arrives. I have sent him a note.
Miss Howard rose immediately from her seat.
If that man comes into the house, I leave it!
No, no! Poirot went up to her and pleaded in a low voice.
Finally Miss Howard consented to return to her chair. A few minutes
later Alfred Inglethorp entered the room.
The company once assembled, Poirot rose from his seat with the air of a
popular lecturer, and bowed politely to his audience.
Messieurs, mesdames , as you all know, I was called in by Monsieur
John Cavendish to investigate this case. I at once examined the bedroom
of the deceased which, by the advice of the doctors, had been kept
locked, and was consequently exactly as it had been when the tragedy
occurred. I found: first, a fragment of green material; second, a stain
on the carpet near the window, still damp; thirdly, an empty box of
bromide powders.
To take the fragment of green material first, I found it caught in the
bolt of the communicating door between that room and the adjoining one
occupied by Mademoiselle Cynthia. I handed the fragment over to the
police who did not consider it of much importance. Nor did they
recognize it for what it was a piece torn from a green land armlet.
There was a little stir of excitement.
Now there was only one person at Styles who worked on the land Mrs.
Cavendish. Therefore it must have been Mrs. Cavendish who entered the
deceased s room through the door communicating with Mademoiselle
Cynthia s room.
But that door was bolted on the inside! I cried.
When I examined the room, yes. But in the first place we have only her
word for it, since it was she who tried that particular door and
reported it fastened. In the ensuing confusion she would have had ample
opportunity to shoot the bolt across. I took an early opportunity of
verifying my conjectures. To begin with, the fragment corresponds
exactly with a tear in Mrs. Cavendish s armlet. Also, at the inquest,
Mrs. Cavendish declared that she had heard, from her own room, the fall
of the table by the bed. I took an early opportunity of testing that
statement by stationing my friend Monsieur Hastings in the left wing of
the building, just outside Mrs. Cavendish s door. I myself, in company
with the police, went to the deceased s room, and whilst there I,
apparently accidentally, knocked over the table in question, but found
that, as I had expected, Monsieur Hastings had heard no sound at all.
This confirmed my belief that Mrs. Cavendish was not speaking the truth
when she declared that she had been dressing in her room at the time of
the tragedy. In fact, I was convinced that, far from having been in her
own room, Mrs. Cavendish was actually in the deceased s room when the
alarm was given.
I shot a quick glance at Mary. She was very pale, but smiling.
I proceeded to reason on that assumption. Mrs. Cavendish is in her
mother in law s room. We will say that she is seeking for something and
has not yet found it. Suddenly Mrs. Inglethorp awakens and is seized
with an alarming paroxysm. She flings out her arm, overturning the bed
table, and then pulls desperately at the bell. Mrs. Cavendish,
startled, drops her candle, scattering the grease on the carpet. She
picks it up, and retreats quickly to Mademoiselle Cynthia s room,
closing the door behind her. She hurries out into the passage, for the
servants must not find her where she is. But it is too late! Already
footsteps are echoing along the gallery which connects the two wings.
What can she do? Quick as thought, she hurries back to the young girl s
room, and starts shaking her awake. The hastily aroused household come
trooping down the passage. They are all busily battering at Mrs.
Inglethorp s door. It occurs to nobody that Mrs. Cavendish has not
arrived with the rest, but and this is significant I can find no one
who saw her come from the other wing. He looked at Mary Cavendish. Am
I right, madame?
She bowed her head.
Quite right, monsieur. You understand that, if I had thought I would
do my husband any good by revealing these facts, I would have done so.
But it did not seem to me to bear upon the question of his guilt or
innocence.
In a sense, that is correct, madame. But it cleared my mind of many
misconceptions, and left me free to see other facts in their true
significance.
The will! cried Lawrence. Then it was you, Mary, who destroyed the
will?
She shook her head, and Poirot shook his also.
No, he said quietly. There is only one person who could possibly
have destroyed that will Mrs. Inglethorp herself!
Impossible! I exclaimed. She had only made it out that very
afternoon!
Nevertheless, mon ami , it was Mrs. Inglethorp. Because, in no other
way can you account for the fact that, on one of the hottest days of
the year, Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire to be lighted in her room.
I gave a gasp. What idiots we had been never to think of that fire as
being incongruous! Poirot was continuing:
The temperature on that day, messieurs, was 80 degrees in the shade.
Yet Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire! Why? Because she wished to destroy
something, and could think of no other way. You will remember that, in
consequence of the War economics practiced at Styles, no waste paper
was thrown away. There was therefore no means of destroying a thick
document such as a will. The moment I heard of a fire being lighted in
Mrs. Inglethorp s room, I leaped to the conclusion that it was to
destroy some important document possibly a will. So the discovery of
the charred fragment in the grate was no surprise to me. I did not, of
course, know at the time that the will in question had only been made
this afternoon, and I will admit that, when I learnt that fact, I fell
into a grievous error. I came to the conclusion that Mrs. Inglethorp s
determination to destroy her will arose as a direct consequence of the
quarrel she had that afternoon, and that therefore the quarrel took
place after, and not before the making of the will.
Here, as we know, I was wrong, and I was forced to abandon that idea.
I faced the problem from a new standpoint. Now, at four o clock, Dorcas
overheard her mistress saying angrily: You need not think that any
fear of publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.
I conjectured, and conjectured rightly, that these words were
addressed, not to her husband, but to Mr. John Cavendish. At five
o clock, an hour later, she uses almost the same words, but the
standpoint is different. She admits to Dorcas, I don t know what to
do; scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing. At four
o clock she has been angry, but completely mistress of herself. At five
o clock she is in violent distress, and speaks of having had a great
shock.
Looking at the matter psychologically, I drew one deduction which I
was convinced was correct. The second scandal she spoke of was not
the same as the first and it concerned herself!
Let us reconstruct. At four o clock, Mrs. Inglethorp quarrels with her
son, and threatens to denounce him to his wife who, by the way,
overheard the greater part of the conversation. At four thirty, Mrs.
Inglethorp, in consequence of a conversation on the validity of wills,
makes a will in favour of her husband, which the two gardeners witness.
At five o clock, Dorcas finds her mistress in a state of considerable
agitation, with a slip of paper a letter, Dorcas thinks in her hand,
and it is then that she orders the fire in her room to be lighted.
Presumably, then, between four thirty and five o clock, something has
occurred to occasion a complete revolution of feeling, since she is now
as anxious to destroy the will, as she was before to make it. What was
that something?
As far as we know, she was quite alone during that half hour. Nobody
entered or left that boudoir. What then occasioned this sudden change
of sentiment?
One can only guess, but I believe my guess to be correct. Mrs.
Inglethorp had no stamps in her desk. We know this, because later she
asked Dorcas to bring her some. Now in the opposite corner of the room
stood her husband s desk locked. She was anxious to find some stamps,
and, according to my theory, she tried her own keys in the desk. That
one of them fitted I know. She therefore opened the desk, and in
searching for the stamps she came across something else that slip of
paper which Dorcas saw in her hand, and which assuredly was never meant
for Mrs. Inglethorp s eyes. On the other hand, Mrs. Cavendish believed
that the slip of paper to which her mother in law clung so tenaciously
was a written proof of her own husband s infidelity. She demanded it
from Mrs. Inglethorp who assured her, quite truly, that it had nothing
to do with that matter. Mrs. Cavendish did not believe her. She thought
that Mrs. Inglethorp was shielding her stepson. Now Mrs. Cavendish is a
very resolute woman, and, behind her mask of reserve, she was madly
jealous of her husband. She determined to get hold of that paper at all
costs, and in this resolution chance came to her aid. She happened to
pick up the key of Mrs. Inglethorp s despatch case, which had been lost
that morning. She knew that her mother in law invariably kept all
important papers in this particular case.
Mrs. Cavendish, therefore, made her plans as only a woman driven
desperate through jealousy could have done. Some time in the evening
she unbolted the door leading into Mademoiselle Cynthia s room.
Possibly she applied oil to the hinges, for I found that it opened
quite noiselessly when I tried it. She put off her project until the
early hours of the morning as being safer, since the servants were
accustomed to hearing her move about her room at that time. She dressed
completely in her land kit, and made her way quietly through
Mademoiselle Cynthia s room into that of Mrs. Inglethorp.
He paused a moment, and Cynthia interrupted:
But I should have woken up if anyone had come through my room?
Not if you were drugged, mademoiselle.
Drugged?
Mais, oui!
You remember he addressed us collectively again that through all the
tumult and noise next door Mademoiselle Cynthia slept. That admitted of
two possibilities. Either her sleep was feigned which I did not
believe or her unconsciousness was indeed by artificial means.
With this latter idea in my mind, I examined all the coffee cups most
carefully, remembering that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had brought
Mademoiselle Cynthia her coffee the night before. I took a sample from
each cup, and had them analysed with no result. I had counted the cups
carefully, in the event of one having been removed. Six persons had
taken coffee, and six cups were duly found. I had to confess myself
mistaken.
Then I discovered that I had been guilty of a very grave oversight.
Coffee had been brought in for seven persons, not six, for Dr.
Bauerstein had been there that evening. This changed the face of the
whole affair, for there was now one cup missing. The servants noticed
nothing, since Annie, the housemaid, who took in the coffee, brought in
seven cups, not knowing that Mr. Inglethorp never drank it, whereas
Dorcas, who cleared them away the following morning, found six as
usual or strictly speaking she found five, the sixth being the one
found broken in Mrs. Inglethorp s room.
I was confident that the missing cup was that of Mademoiselle Cynthia.
I had an additional reason for that belief in the fact that all the
cups found contained sugar, which Mademoiselle Cynthia never took in
her coffee. My attention was attracted by the story of Annie about some
salt on the tray of cocoa which she took every night to Mrs.
Inglethorp s room. I accordingly secured a sample of that cocoa, and
sent it to be analysed.
But that had already been done by Dr. Bauerstein, said Lawrence
quickly.
Not exactly. The analyst was asked by him to report whether strychnine
was, or was not, present. He did not have it tested, as I did, for a
narcotic.
For a narcotic?
Yes. Here is the analyst s report. Mrs. Cavendish administered a safe,
but effectual, narcotic to both Mrs. Inglethorp and Mademoiselle
Cynthia. And it is possible that she had a mauvais quart d heure in
consequence! Imagine her feelings when her mother in law is suddenly
taken ill and dies, and immediately after she hears the word Poison !
She has believed that the sleeping draught she administered was
perfectly harmless, but there is no doubt that for one terrible moment
she must have feared that Mrs. Inglethorp s death lay at her door. She
is seized with panic, and under its influence she hurries downstairs,
and quickly drops the coffee cup and saucer used by Mademoiselle
Cynthia into a large brass vase, where it is discovered later by
Monsieur Lawrence. The remains of the cocoa she dare not touch. Too
many eyes are upon her. Guess at her relief when strychnine is
mentioned, and she discovers that after all the tragedy is not her
doing.
We are now able to account for the symptoms of strychnine poisoning
being so long in making their appearance. A narcotic taken with
strychnine will delay the action of the poison for some hours.
Poirot paused. Mary looked up at him, the colour slowly rising in her
face.
All you have said is quite true, Monsieur Poirot. It was the most
awful hour of my life. I shall never forget it. But you are wonderful.
I understand now
What I meant when I told you that you could safely confess to Papa
Poirot, eh? But you would not trust me.
I see everything now, said Lawrence. The drugged cocoa, taken on top
of the poisoned coffee, amply accounts for the delay.
Exactly. But was the coffee poisoned, or was it not? We come to a
little difficulty here, since Mrs. Inglethorp never drank it.
What? The cry of surprise was universal.
No. You will remember my speaking of a stain on the carpet in Mrs.
Inglethorp s room? There were some peculiar points about that stain. It
was still damp, it exhaled a strong odour of coffee, and imbedded in
the nap of the carpet I found some little splinters of china. What had
happened was plain to me, for not two minutes before I had placed my
little case on the table near the window, and the table, tilting up,
had deposited it upon the floor on precisely the identical spot. In
exactly the same way, Mrs. Inglethorp had laid down her cup of coffee
on reaching her room the night before, and the treacherous table had
played her the same trick.
What happened next is mere guess work on my part, but I should say
that Mrs. Inglethorp picked up the broken cup and placed it on the
table by the bed. Feeling in need of a stimulant of some kind, she
heated up her cocoa, and drank it off then and there. Now we are faced
with a new problem. We know the cocoa contained no strychnine. The
coffee was never drunk. Yet the strychnine must have been administered
between seven and nine o clock that evening. What third medium was
there a medium so suitable for disguising the taste of strychnine that
it is extraordinary no one has thought of it? Poirot looked round the
room, and then answered himself impressively. Her medicine!
Do you mean that the murderer introduced the strychnine into her
tonic? I cried.
There was no need to introduce it. It was already there in the
mixture. The strychnine that killed Mrs. Inglethorp was the identical
strychnine prescribed by Dr. Wilkins. To make that clear to you, I will
read you an extract from a book on dispensing which I found in the
Dispensary of the Red Cross Hospital at Tadminster:
The following prescription has become famous in text books:
Strychninae Sulph. . . . . . 1 gr.
Potass Bromide . . . . . . . 3vi
Aqua ad. . . . . . . . . . . . . 3viii
Fiat Mistura
This solution deposits in a few hours the greater part of the
strychnine salt as an insoluble bromide in transparent crystals. A lady
in England lost her life by taking a similar mixture: the precipitated
strychnine collected at the bottom, and in taking the last dose she
swallowed nearly all of it!
Now there was, of course, no bromide in Dr. Wilkins prescription, but
you will remember that I mentioned an empty box of bromide powders. One
or two of those powders introduced into the full bottle of medicine
would effectually precipitate the strychnine, as the book describes,
and cause it to be taken in the last dose. You will learn later that
the person who usually poured out Mrs. Inglethorp s medicine was always
extremely careful not to shake the bottle, but to leave the sediment at
the bottom of it undisturbed.
Throughout the case, there have been evidences that the tragedy was
intended to take place on Monday evening. On that day, Mrs.
Inglethorp s bell wire was neatly cut, and on Monday evening
Mademoiselle Cynthia was spending the night with friends, so that Mrs.
Inglethorp would have been quite alone in the right wing, completely
shut off from help of any kind, and would have died, in all
probability, before medical aid could have been summoned. But in her
hurry to be in time for the village entertainment Mrs. Inglethorp
forgot to take her medicine, and the next day she lunched away from
home, so that the last and fatal dose was actually taken twenty four
hours later than had been anticipated by the murderer; and it is owing
to that delay that the final proof the last link of the chain is now in
my hands.
Amid breathless excitement, he held out three thin strips of paper.
A letter in the murderer s own hand writing, mes amis! Had it been a
little clearer in its terms, it is possible that Mrs. Inglethorp,
warned in time, would have escaped. As it was, she realized her danger,
but not the manner of it.
In the deathly silence, Poirot pieced together the slips of paper and,
clearing his throat, read:
Dearest Evelyn:
You will be anxious at hearing nothing. It is all right only it
will be to night instead of last night. You understand. There s a
good time coming once the old woman is dead and out of the way. No
one can possibly bring home the crime to me. That idea of yours
about the bromides was a stroke of genius! But we must be very
circumspect. A false step
Here, my friends, the letter breaks off. Doubtless the writer was
interrupted; but there can be no question as to his identity. We all
know this hand writing and
A howl that was almost a scream broke the silence.
You devil! How did you get it?
A chair was overturned. Poirot skipped nimbly aside. A quick movement
on his part, and his assailant fell with a crash.
Messieurs, mesdames , said Poirot, with a flourish, let me
introduce you to the murderer, Mr. Alfred Inglethorp!
CHAPTER XIII. POIROT EXPLAINS
Poirot, you old villain, I said, I ve half a mind to strangle you!
What do you mean by deceiving me as you have done?
We were sitting in the library. Several hectic days lay behind us. In
the room below, John and Mary were together once more, while Alfred
Inglethorp and Miss Howard were in custody. Now at last, I had Poirot
to myself, and could relieve my still burning curiosity.
Poirot did not answer me for a moment, but at last he said:
I did not deceive you, mon ami . At most, I permitted you to deceive
yourself.
Yes, but why?
Well, it is difficult to explain. You see, my friend, you have a
nature so honest, and a countenance so transparent, that enfin , to
conceal your feelings is impossible! If I had told you my ideas, the
very first time you saw Mr. Alfred Inglethorp that astute gentleman
would have in your so expressive idiom smelt a rat ! And then,
bonjour to our chances of catching him!
I think that I have more diplomacy than you give me credit for.
My friend, besought Poirot, I implore you, do not enrage yourself!
Your help has been of the most invaluable. It is but the extremely
beautiful nature that you have, which made me pause.
Well, I grumbled, a little mollified. I still think you might have
given me a hint.
But I did, my friend. Several hints. You would not take them. Think
now, did I ever say to you that I believed John Cavendish guilty? Did I
not, on the contrary, tell you that he would almost certainly be
acquitted?
Yes, but
And did I not immediately afterwards speak of the difficulty of
bringing the murderer to justice? Was it not plain to you that I was
speaking of two entirely different persons?
No, I said, it was not plain to me!
Then again, continued Poirot, at the beginning, did I not repeat to
you several times that I didn t want Mr. Inglethorp arrested now ?
That should have conveyed something to you.
Do you mean to say you suspected him as long ago as that?
Yes. To begin with, whoever else might benefit by Mrs. Inglethorp s
death, her husband would benefit the most. There was no getting away
from that. When I went up to Styles with you that first day, I had no
idea as to how the crime had been committed, but from what I knew of
Mr. Inglethorp I fancied that it would be very hard to find anything to
connect him with it. When I arrived at the ch teau, I realized at once
that it was Mrs. Inglethorp who had burnt the will; and there, by the
way, you cannot complain, my friend, for I tried my best to force on
you the significance of that bedroom fire in midsummer.
Yes, yes, I said impatiently. Go on.
Well, my friend, as I say, my views as to Mr. Inglethorp s guilt were
very much shaken. There was, in fact, so much evidence against him that
I was inclined to believe that he had not done it.
When did you change your mind?
When I found that the more efforts I made to clear him, the more
efforts he made to get himself arrested. Then, when I discovered that
Inglethorp had nothing to do with Mrs. Raikes and that in fact it was
John Cavendish who was interested in that quarter, I was quite sure.
But why?
Simply this. If it had been Inglethorp who was carrying on an intrigue
with Mrs. Raikes, his silence was perfectly comprehensible. But, when I
discovered that it was known all over the village that it was John who
was attracted by the farmer s pretty wife, his silence bore quite a
different interpretation. It was nonsense to pretend that he was afraid
of the scandal, as no possible scandal could attach to him. This
attitude of his gave me furiously to think, and I was slowly forced to
the conclusion that Alfred Inglethorp wanted to be arrested. Eh bien!
from that moment, I was equally determined that he should not be
arrested.
Wait a minute. I don t see why he wished to be arrested?
Because, mon ami , it is the law of your country that a man once
acquitted can never be tried again for the same offence. Aha! but it
was clever his idea! Assuredly, he is a man of method. See here, he
knew that in his position he was bound to be suspected, so he conceived
the exceedingly clever idea of preparing a lot of manufactured evidence
against himself. He wished to be arrested. He would then produce his
irreproachable alibi and, hey presto, he was safe for life!
But I still don t see how he managed to prove his alibi, and yet go to
the chemist s shop?
Poirot stared at me in surprise.
Is it possible? My poor friend! You have not yet realized that it was
Miss Howard who went to the chemist s shop?
Miss Howard?
But, certainly. Who else? It was most easy for her. She is of a good
height, her voice is deep and manly; moreover, remember, she and
Inglethorp are cousins, and there is a distinct resemblance between
them, especially in their gait and bearing. It was simplicity itself.
They are a clever pair!
I am still a little fogged as to how exactly the bromide business was
done, I remarked.
Bon! I will reconstruct for you as far as possible. I am inclined to
think that Miss Howard was the master mind in that affair. You remember
her once mentioning that her father was a doctor? Possibly she
dispensed his medicines for him, or she may have taken the idea from
one of the many books lying about when Mademoiselle Cynthia was
studying for her exam. Anyway, she was familiar with the fact that the
addition of a bromide to a mixture containing strychnine would cause
the precipitation of the latter. Probably the idea came to her quite
suddenly. Mrs. Inglethorp had a box of bromide powders, which she
occasionally took at night. What could be easier than quietly to
dissolve one or more of those powders in Mrs. Inglethorp s large sized
bottle of medicine when it came from Coot s? The risk is practically
nil. The tragedy will not take place until nearly a fortnight later. If
anyone has seen either of them touching the medicine, they will have
forgotten it by that time. Miss Howard will have engineered her
quarrel, and departed from the house. The lapse of time, and her
absence, will defeat all suspicion. Yes, it was a clever idea! If they
had left it alone, it is possible the crime might never have been
brought home to them. But they were not satisfied. They tried to be too
clever and that was their undoing.
Poirot puffed at his tiny cigarette, his eyes fixed on the ceiling.
They arranged a plan to throw suspicion on John Cavendish, by buying
strychnine at the village chemist s, and signing the register in his
hand writing.
On Monday Mrs. Inglethorp will take the last dose of her medicine. On
Monday, therefore, at six o clock, Alfred Inglethorp arranges to be
seen by a number of people at a spot far removed from the village. Miss
Howard has previously made up a cock and bull story about him and Mrs.
Raikes to account for his holding his tongue afterwards. At six
o clock, Miss Howard, disguised as Alfred Inglethorp, enters the
chemist s shop, with her story about a dog, obtains the strychnine, and
writes the name of Alfred Inglethorp in John s handwriting, which she
had previously studied carefully.
But, as it will never do if John, too, can prove an alibi, she writes
him an anonymous note still copying his hand writing which takes him to
a remote spot where it is exceedingly unlikely that anyone will see
him.
So far, all goes well. Miss Howard goes back to Middlingham. Alfred
Inglethorp returns to Styles. There is nothing that can compromise him
in any way, since it is Miss Howard who has the strychnine, which,
after all, is only wanted as a blind to throw suspicion on John
Cavendish.
But now a hitch occurs. Mrs. Inglethorp does not take her medicine
that night. The broken bell, Cynthia s absence arranged by Inglethorp
through his wife all these are wasted. And then he makes his slip.
Mrs. Inglethorp is out, and he sits down to write to his accomplice,
who, he fears, may be in a panic at the non success of their plan. It
is probable that Mrs. Inglethorp returned earlier than he expected.
Caught in the act, and somewhat flurried he hastily shuts and locks his
desk. He fears that if he remains in the room he may have to open it
again, and that Mrs. Inglethorp might catch sight of the letter before
he could snatch it up. So he goes out and walks in the woods, little
dreaming that Mrs. Inglethorp will open his desk, and discover the
incriminating document.
But this, as we know, is what happened. Mrs. Inglethorp reads it, and
becomes aware of the perfidy of her husband and Evelyn Howard, though,
unfortunately, the sentence about the bromides conveys no warning to
her mind. She knows that she is in danger but is ignorant of where the
danger lies. She decides to say nothing to her husband, but sits down
and writes to her solicitor, asking him to come on the morrow, and she
also determines to destroy immediately the will which she has just
made. She keeps the fatal letter.
It was to discover that letter, then, that her husband forced the lock
of the despatch case?
Yes, and from the enormous risk he ran we can see how fully he
realized its importance. That letter excepted, there was absolutely
nothing to connect him with the crime.
There s only one thing I can t make out, why didn t he destroy it at
once when he got hold of it?
Because he did not dare take the biggest risk of all that of keeping
it on his own person.
I don t understand.
Look at it from his point of view. I have discovered that there were
only five short minutes in which he could have taken it the five
minutes immediately before our own arrival on the scene, for before
that time Annie was brushing the stairs, and would have seen anyone who
passed going to the right wing. Figure to yourself the scene! He enters
the room, unlocking the door by means of one of the other doorkeys they
were all much alike. He hurries to the despatch case it is locked, and
the keys are nowhere to be seen. That is a terrible blow to him, for it
means that his presence in the room cannot be concealed as he had
hoped. But he sees clearly that everything must be risked for the sake
of that damning piece of evidence. Quickly, he forces the lock with a
penknife, and turns over the papers until he finds what he is looking
for.
But now a fresh dilemma arises: he dare not keep that piece of paper
on him. He may be seen leaving the room he may be searched. If the
paper is found on him, it is certain doom. Probably, at this minute,
too, he hears the sounds below of Mr. Wells and John leaving the
boudoir. He must act quickly. Where can he hide this terrible slip of
paper? The contents of the waste paper basket are kept and in any case,
are sure to be examined. There are no means of destroying it; and he
dare not keep it. He looks round, and he sees what do you think, mon
ami?
I shook my head.
In a moment, he has torn the letter into long thin strips, and rolling
them up into spills he thrusts them hurriedly in amongst the other
spills in the vase on the mantle piece.
I uttered an exclamation.
No one would think of looking there, Poirot continued. And he will
be able, at his leisure, to come back and destroy this solitary piece
of evidence against him.
Then, all the time, it was in the spill vase in Mrs. Inglethorp s
bedroom, under our very noses? I cried.
Poirot nodded.
Yes, my friend. That is where I discovered my last link, and I owe
that very fortunate discovery to you.
To me?
Yes. Do you remember telling me that my hand shook as I was
straightening the ornaments on the mantelpiece?
Yes, but I don t see
No, but I saw. Do you know, my friend, I remembered that earlier in
the morning, when we had been there together, I had straightened all
the objects on the mantelpiece. And, if they were already straightened,
there would be no need to straighten them again, unless, in the
meantime, someone else had touched them.
Dear me, I murmured, so that is the explanation of your
extraordinary behaviour. You rushed down to Styles, and found it still
there?
Yes, and it was a race for time.
But I still can t understand why Inglethorp was such a fool as to
leave it there when he had plenty of opportunity to destroy it.
Ah, but he had no opportunity. I saw to that.
You?
Yes. Do you remember reproving me for taking the household into my
confidence on the subject?
Yes.
Well, my friend, I saw there was just one chance. I was not sure then
if Inglethorp was the criminal or not, but if he was I reasoned that he
would not have the paper on him, but would have hidden it somewhere,
and by enlisting the sympathy of the household I could effectually
prevent his destroying it. He was already under suspicion, and by
making the matter public I secured the services of about ten amateur
detectives, who would be watching him unceasingly, and being himself
aware of their watchfulness he would not dare seek further to destroy
the document. He was therefore forced to depart from the house, leaving
it in the spill vase.
But surely Miss Howard had ample opportunities of aiding him.
Yes, but Miss Howard did not know of the paper s existence. In
accordance with their prearranged plan, she never spoke to Alfred
Inglethorp. They were supposed to be deadly enemies, and until John
Cavendish was safely convicted they neither of them dared risk a
meeting. Of course I had a watch kept on Mr. Inglethorp, hoping that
sooner or later he would lead me to the hiding place. But he was too
clever to take any chances. The paper was safe where it was; since no
one had thought of looking there in the first week, it was not likely
they would do so afterwards. But for your lucky remark, we might never
have been able to bring him to justice.
I understand that now; but when did you first begin to suspect Miss
Howard?
When I discovered that she had told a lie at the inquest about the
letter she had received from Mrs. Inglethorp.
Why, what was there to lie about?
You saw that letter? Do you recall its general appearance?
Yes more or less.
You will recollect, then, that Mrs. Inglethorp wrote a very
distinctive hand, and left large clear spaces between her words. But if
you look at the date at the top of the letter you will notice that
July 17th is quite different in this respect. Do you see what I
mean?
No, I confessed, I don t.
You do not see that that letter was not written on the 17th, but on
the 7th the day after Miss Howard s departure? The 1 was written in
before the 7 to turn it into the 17th .
But why?
That is exactly what I asked myself. Why does Miss Howard suppress the
letter written on the 17th, and produce this faked one instead? Because
she did not wish to show the letter of the 17th. Why, again? And at
once a suspicion dawned in my mind. You will remember my saying that it
was wise to beware of people who were not telling you the truth.
And yet, I cried indignantly, after that, you gave me two reasons
why Miss Howard could not have committed the crime!
And very good reasons too, replied Poirot. For a long time they were
a stumbling block to me until I remembered a very significant fact:
that she and Alfred Inglethorp were cousins. She could not have
committed the crime single handed, but the reasons against that did not
debar her from being an accomplice. And, then, there was that rather
over vehement hatred of hers! It concealed a very opposite emotion.
There was, undoubtedly, a tie of passion between them long before he
came to Styles. They had already arranged their infamous plot that he
should marry this rich, but rather foolish old lady, induce her to make
a will leaving her money to him, and then gain their ends by a very
cleverly conceived crime. If all had gone as they planned, they would
probably have left England, and lived together on their poor victim s
money.
They are a very astute and unscrupulous pair. While suspicion was to
be directed against him, she would be making quiet preparations for a
very different d nouement . She arrives from Middlingham with all the
compromising items in her possession. No suspicion attaches to her. No
notice is paid to her coming and going in the house. She hides the
strychnine and glasses in John s room. She puts the beard in the attic.
She will see to it that sooner or later they are duly discovered.
I don t quite see why they tried to fix the blame on John, I
remarked. It would have been much easier for them to bring the crime
home to Lawrence.
Yes, but that was mere chance. All the evidence against him arose out
of pure accident. It must, in fact, have been distinctly annoying to
the pair of schemers.
His manner was unfortunate, I observed thoughtfully.
Yes. You realize, of course, what was at the back of that?
No.
You did not understand that he believed Mademoiselle Cynthia guilty of
the crime?
No, I exclaimed, astonished. Impossible!
Not at all. I myself nearly had the same idea. It was in my mind when
I asked Mr. Wells that first question about the will. Then there were
the bromide powders which she had made up, and her clever male
impersonations, as Dorcas recounted them to us. There was really more
evidence against her than anyone else.
You are joking, Poirot!
No. Shall I tell you what made Monsieur Lawrence turn so pale when he
first entered his mother s room on the fatal night? It was because,
whilst his mother lay there, obviously poisoned, he saw, over your
shoulder, that the door into Mademoiselle Cynthia s room was unbolted.
But he declared that he saw it bolted! I cried.
Exactly, said Poirot dryly. And that was just what confirmed my
suspicion that it was not. He was shielding Mademoiselle Cynthia.
But why should he shield her?
Because he is in love with her.
I laughed.
There, Poirot, you are quite wrong! I happen to know for a fact that,
far from being in love with her, he positively dislikes her.
Who told you that, mon ami?
Cynthia herself.
La pauvre petite! And she was concerned?
She said that she did not mind at all.
Then she certainly did mind very much, remarked Poirot. They are
like that les femmes!
What you say about Lawrence is a great surprise to me, I said.
But why? It was most obvious. Did not Monsieur Lawrence make the sour
face every time Mademoiselle Cynthia spoke and laughed with his
brother? He had taken it into his long head that Mademoiselle Cynthia
was in love with Monsieur John. When he entered his mother s room, and
saw her obviously poisoned, he jumped to the conclusion that
Mademoiselle Cynthia knew something about the matter. He was nearly
driven desperate. First he crushed the coffee cup to powder under his
feet, remembering that she had gone up with his mother the night
before, and he determined that there should be no chance of testing its
contents. Thenceforward, he strenuously, and quite uselessly, upheld
the theory of Death from natural causes .
And what about the extra coffee cup ?
I was fairly certain that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had hidden it, but
I had to make sure. Monsieur Lawrence did not know at all what I meant;
but, on reflection, he came to the conclusion that if he could find an
extra coffee cup anywhere his lady love would be cleared of suspicion.
And he was perfectly right.
One thing more. What did Mrs. Inglethorp mean by her dying words?
They were, of course, an accusation against her husband.
Dear me, Poirot, I said with a sigh, I think you have explained
everything. I am glad it has all ended so happily. Even John and his
wife are reconciled.
Thanks to me.
How do you mean thanks to you?
My dear friend, do you not realize that it was simply and solely the
trial which has brought them together again? That John Cavendish still
loved his wife, I was convinced. Also, that she was equally in love
with him. But they had drifted very far apart. It all arose from a
misunderstanding. She married him without love. He knew it. He is a
sensitive man in his way, he would not force himself upon her if she
did not want him. And, as he withdrew, her love awoke. But they are
both unusually proud, and their pride held them inexorably apart. He
drifted into an entanglement with Mrs. Raikes, and she deliberately
cultivated the friendship of Dr. Bauerstein. Do you remember the day of
John Cavendish s arrest, when you found me deliberating over a big
decision?
Yes, I quite understood your distress.
Pardon me, mon ami , but you did not understand it in the least. I
was trying to decide whether or not I would clear John Cavendish at
once. I could have cleared him though it might have meant a failure to
convict the real criminals. They were entirely in the dark as to my
real attitude up to the very last moment which partly accounts for my
success.
Do you mean that you could have saved John Cavendish from being
brought to trial?
Yes, my friend. But I eventually decided in favour of a woman s
happiness . Nothing but the great danger through which they have passed
could have brought these two proud souls together again.
I looked at Poirot in silent amazement. The colossal cheek of the
little man! Who on earth but Poirot would have thought of a trial for
murder as a restorer of conjugal happiness!
I perceive your thoughts, mon ami , said Poirot, smiling at me. No
one but Hercule Poirot would have attempted such a thing! And you are
wrong in condemning it. The happiness of one man and one woman is the
greatest thing in all the world.
His words took me back to earlier events. I remembered Mary as she lay
white and exhausted on the sofa, listening, listening. There had come
the sound of the bell below. She had started up. Poirot had opened the
door, and meeting her agonized eyes had nodded gently. Yes, madame,
he said. I have brought him back to you. He had stood aside, and as I
went out I had seen the look in Mary s eyes, as John Cavendish had
caught his wife in his arms.
Perhaps you are right, Poirot, I said gently. Yes, it is the
greatest thing in the world.
Suddenly, there was a tap at the door, and Cynthia peeped in.
I I only
Come in, I said, springing up.
She came in, but did not sit down.
I only wanted to tell you something
Yes?
Cynthia fidgeted with a little tassel for some moments, then, suddenly
exclaiming: You dears! kissed first me and then Poirot, and rushed
out of the room again.
What on earth does this mean? I asked, surprised.
It was very nice to be kissed by Cynthia, but the publicity of the
salute rather impaired the pleasure.
It means that she has discovered Monsieur Lawrence does not dislike
her as much as she thought, replied Poirot philosophically.
But
Here he is.
Lawrence at that moment passed the door.
Eh! Monsieur Lawrence, called Poirot. We must congratulate you, is
it not so?
Lawrence blushed, and then smiled awkwardly. A man in love is a sorry
spectacle. Now Cynthia had looked charming.
I sighed.
What is it, mon ami?
Nothing, I said sadly. They are two delightful women!
And neither of them is for you? finished Poirot. Never mind. Console
yourself, my friend. We may hunt together again, who knows? And then
THE END
innocent that he did not commit that crime in the crooked garden
to night and that I do not intend to allow him to be hanged for a crime
that he did not commit would you give a certain amount of your time to
help me to save him?
Certainly. I will do anything I can.
Then, said Monsieur Dupont, I answer the question you asked a moment
ago. He did not kill her.
Who did? Tranter demanded, looking at him in astonishment.
That is another matter. It is one thing to say who did not but quite
another to say who did. That is for us to discover. There will be very
little time. I think I can promise you excitement. Possibly there will
be danger. You do not object to that?
I have faced a certain amount of danger in my time, Tranter replied.
Good, said Monsieur Dupont. Then we will set ourselves quite apart
from the efforts of our friend, Inspector Fay to solve the mystery of
the crooked garden. And we will not speak a word to any one of our
intention.
You seem to have some very definite ideas on the subject already,
Tranter observed.
Ah, no, demurred Monsieur Dupont do not credit me with the
superhuman. We have a very difficult task before us.
But what of your other object, Tranter inquired the riddle that
you came over to solve?
It may be, Monsieur Dupont replied carefully, that there is some
connection between my riddle and this dreadful affair to night. At
present I cannot say. Only events themselves can prove that.
But that very possibility compels me to take up a peculiar
attitude unfortunately a most necessary one. If you will assist me as
I beg you to do you must be content to follow my guidance and
instructions without question, and remain, as you call it, in the dark,
until the time comes for all to be told.
You are certainly the most mysterious person I have ever met! Tranter
exclaimed.
It is not that I have the smallest doubt of yourself or your
discretion, Monsieur Dupont hastened to explain. On the contrary. It
is simply that my position at this moment is an extraordinary one, and I
cannot do what would seem to be the natural and ordinary thing. Will you
help me on that understanding?
I will help you in any case, Tranter agreed, smiling slightly at his
companion s intense seriousness. What is to be my first task?
Your first task, said Monsieur Dupont gravely, is to deposit me at
the Hotel Savoy, and call for me later on your way back to Richmond.
Tranter spoke some instructions through the speaking tube to the
chauffeur. When he turned again, Monsieur Dupont was asleep. He did not
open his eyes again until the car stopped at the Savoy.
Entering the hotel, he ascended to his room. In it, he mixed himself a
whisky and soda, sat down at the writing table, and unlocked a
despatch box.
He took out two photographs each of a remarkably beautiful woman.
Under one was neatly written
Colette d Orsel. Nice. August 1900.
And under the other
Margaret McCall. Boston. Dec. 1910.
From his pocket he took the photograph which the inspector had allowed
him to appropriate, and laid it beside the others. The face that smiled
up at him was the most beautiful of the three.
He dipped a pen in the ink, and wrote under it, in the same neat
handwriting
Christine Manderson. London. July 1919.
CHAPTER XIV
WITHOUT TRACE
At ten o clock, Tranter and Monsieur Dupont stood with Inspector Fay in
the garden. The Rev. Percival Delamere joined them a few minutes later,
and the theatrical manager arrived shortly afterwards. Finally, still in
the same half dazed condition, George Copplestone emerged from the
house.
Mon Dieu , Monsieur Dupont whispered quickly. Look at that man!
His face was white, with a sickly pasty whiteness. In the few hours that
had passed he seemed to have wasted to a startling gauntness. His cheeks
were drawn, his sunken eyes dull and filmy. He moved slowly and heavily,
as if compelling himself under an utter weariness.
What do you want first? he asked the inspector curtly.
First, replied Inspector Fay, I want to be shown the spot where the
body was found.
Copplestone led the way across the lawns. In the daylight Monsieur
Dupont eagerly followed the maze of winding paths and hedges that had
imprisoned him so helplessly in the darkness. It was a veritable
looking glass garden. The end of every path mocked its beginning. To
reach an object it was necessary to walk away from it. To arrive at the
bank of the river, Copplestone conducted his followers in the opposite
direction.
This garden might have been designed for a crime, the inspector
remarked, as they turned yet another corner.
It was, Monsieur Dupont agreed from the rear. It was designed for the
most abominable crime of making men and women go backwards instead of
forwards. And last night it attained the height of its purpose.
For an instant Copplestone glanced back at him, a quickening in his dull
eyes. A moment afterwards they turned a final corner, and emerged on to
the broad lawns, sloping down to the edge of the river.
Copplestone halted, and looked round, measuring distances. Then he moved
on, keeping close to the trees.
About here, I think, said the clergyman, pausing.
Copplestone stopped a few paces ahead.
It was very dark, he said, looking at the ground. I don t think I
knew exactly where we were. As near as I can judge, it was just here.
There ought to have been some sign left to mark the place when the body
was taken away, the inspector said sharply.
You will find, said the quiet voice of Monsieur Dupont, a pencil in
the ground at the exact spot. It is a useful pencil, and I should be
obliged if you would kindly return it to me.
The inspector shot him a rather grim smile. All, except Copplestone,
bent down to look for the sign.
Here it is, Tranter exclaimed, pulling a pencil out of the ground.
They stood aside to give the inspector room.
The rain has washed away any traces that might have helped us, that
official grumbled, after a fruitless search.
And even if it had not, the manager observed, you would only have
found traces of all of us, as we were all here.
The inspector continued his examination. Copplestone stood apart, his
eyes fixed on the river. He did not appear to be taking the slightest
interest in the proceedings.
In what position was the body lying? the inspector asked, looking up
at the clergyman.
It was so horribly contorted that it is difficult to say in what
position it was lying, the latter replied, bending down beside him.
The head, I think, lay towards the river, and the feet towards the
trees.
It was so when we came, Copplestone corroborated, without turning his
head.
There are no signs of a struggle here, said the inspector,
straightening himself after another pause. If there had been one, some
of the heavier indications might have remained in spite of the rain.
It is possible, Monsieur Dupont suggested, that the body was carried
here from the place where the struggle did take place.
Quite possible, the inspector agreed. He turned to Tranter. Will you
show us now, Mr. Tranter, where you parted from Miss Manderson?
I am not familiar with the garden, Tranter replied. I only know, as I
told you last night, that we had just passed under some arches across
the path. I do not know where they are.
Mr. Copplestone will show us, said the inspector.
Copplestone started at the sound of his own name, and turned to them.
What next? he asked abruptly.
The rose arches, returned the inspector.
Copplestone indicated an opening in the trees, some distance ahead of
them.
Over here, he directed, moving towards it.
There were twelve ornamental arches, overgrown with roses. Monsieur
Dupont looked at the wealth of flowers almost with reverence.
So far, he muttered, the only innocent things I have seen in this
garden.
Tranter stopped at a point where several paths intersected.
I left her here, he said. I went down that path to the right, which
she told me would lead to the main lawns where I should be most likely
to Mr. Copplestone. She said she was going straight back to the house.
She should have taken that path, Copplestone said, turning to one in
another direction. That is the way to the house.
Did she know the garden well? asked the inspector.
Perfectly well.
Still, she might easily have taken a wrong turning in the darkness.
She might. But it is about the straightest path in the garden. I don t
think she would have made a mistake.
Slowly and carefully Inspector Fay followed the path to the house, under
the guidance of Copplestone. Every yard of the way was examined, but
yielded nothing. The inspector s face became darker and darker. He
stopped when they turned a corner and found themselves at the house.
She could not possibly have got so far as this before the attack was
made, he said discontentedly.
Impossible, agreed the manager. If the murderer had killed her here,
he would have left her here. He would not have taken the risk of
dragging her all the way to the river.
It seems a curious thing, the clergyman remarked, that apparently she
did not utter any cry for help.
Ah! said Monsieur Dupont quietly.
He looked at the clergyman with a new interest. Copplestone also glanced
at him quickly.
Even the thunder would hardly have drowned a sharp cry, and some one
would surely have heard it.
Probably she hadn t time, suggested the manager. No doubt he sprang
out and attacked her from the back. He must have been as quick as the
lightning itself.
Monsieur Dupont drew Tranter aside.
Our clerical friend does not realize the importance of his own point,
he said softly. But he has put his finger on the key to the whole
mystery.
The key? Tranter repeated.
If Christine Manderson had uttered a cry for help, this would have been
a simple, straightforward case, said Monsieur Dupont. In the fact that
she did not lies the whole secret of the crime.
Bolsover s reason would seem to be the obvious one, Tranter returned.
The assault must have been made so quickly that she had no time.
Mr. Bolsover s reason is, as you say, the obvious one, admitted
Monsieur Dupont. But it is not the correct one. I have already warned
Inspector Fay to disregard the obvious. If he will not take my advice,
that is his affair.
But what do you mean? asked Tranter.
Monsieur Dupont s voice sank lower.
Don t you see that a cry for help would have completely transformed the
whole case? It would have brought it down in one crash to a human
level. It is the silence the utter, horrible silence that makes it
what it is. It is the silence
The inspector s voice recalled them.
Now, Mr. Bolsover, just whereabouts was Layton when you disturbed him?
He was sneaking round there, the manager replied, pointing to a corner
of the house, towards the drawing room windows.
Which path did he run to when he saw you?
That one to the river.
Does that path communicate anywhere with the one which we presume Miss
Manderson was following to the house?
Yes, said Copplestone.
They moved along the path indicated by the manager. It twisted about
unproductively for some distance.
How far was he in front of you? asked the inspector.
I don t know, confessed the manager. I should say about ten yards
when we started but I am not much of a runner. I had lost him
altogether before I got here.
They went on.
That cursed rain, the inspector muttered.
This is the branch that leads to the other path, said Copplestone,
halting.
And it was further along there, by that fir tree that I met Monsieur
Dupont, added the manager.
That is so, agreed Monsieur Dupont. Layton certainly did not come
beyond this point in my direction.
By taking that branch, the inspector calculated, he would have met
Miss Manderson just at the time that the crime was committed.
He would, said the manager.
Monsieur Dupont turned again to Tranter.
We must be quick, he whispered, Layton is already hanged.
There doesn t seem to be much chance for him, returned Tranter. It
will be a very strong case. No criminal could complain at being hanged
on such evidence.
And yet, said Monsieur Dupont slowly, so far as the actual crime is
concerned, there is not a single trace. Not one single trace. Is it not
extraordinary?
He doubled his fists.
That luck! he ground out angrily. Again that luck!
What luck? Tranter exclaimed.
If that most unfortunate young man had not come here and made a fool of
himself last night, the police might have searched forever without
finding a clue. There is no clue here. And there was the rain. The very
elements sweep up after the passing of the Destroyer.
What on earth do you mean? Tranter cried.
Hush! said Monsieur Dupont.
I am obliged to you, gentlemen, said the inspector. Your evidence
will of course be required at the inquest, of which you will receive
notice. I need not detain you any longer.
The clergyman and the manager hurried away. Monsieur Dupont lingered at
the inspector s side, and Tranter strolled back with Copplestone.
Well? queried the inspector. Not much doubt about it, is there?
You have a strong case, said Monsieur Dupont. Very strong.
You agree with it?
Monsieur Dupont shrugged his shoulders.
At all events, I am not in position, at present, to contradict it.
You will have your work cut out to build up another one, said the
inspector complacently. There isn t a trace.
That is it, said the other sharply. There is no trace. There is never
a trace. He lowered his voice cautiously. One point I recommend to
you, as I have just recommended it to Tranter that remark of Mr.
Delamere that there was no cry for help.
What of it? returned the inspector.
It is the key, said Monsieur Dupont.
He moved on abruptly, and overtook Tranter.
CHAPTER XV
A BUILDER OF MEN
James Layton occupied two dingy rooms, in a dilapidated house, situated
between a church and a public house, in as squalid and unwholesome a
street as any in the East End of London. In them he spent such time as
was left to him and it was not much after his active ministrations
among the denizens of the miserable neighborhood. They were scantily
furnished, and of comforts there were none. He denied himself anything
beyond the barest necessities of existence, with the exception of a few
books and pipes, which were the companions of his odd moments of
leisure, and he read and smoked in a hard wicker chair, destitute even
of a cushion. He ate sparingly, of food scarcely better than that on
which his neighbors subsisted, and drank little. His clothes were poor,
his shirts frayed, and his boots patched and his income was a thousand
pounds a week.
In his work he was unusually broad minded and unprejudiced. He spent
none of his time in efforts to lure the occupants of the public house on
his left into the church on his right. Indeed, he was an excellent
customer of the former institution, and was on the best of terms with
its landlord, who was an ex pugilist after his kind. He made no
discrimination in the dispensation of his charity. He worked on the
principle that before he reformed a man he must feed him so before he
attempted to deal with the mind he relieved the body. He was open handed
and unsuspicious and wonderfully beloved. There were hundreds of people
in that street, and many other streets, who would gladly have laid down
their lives for him and who imposed on him shockingly day after day in
the minor matters of life. The Mad Philanthropist never turned
away never refused. He was a builder of Men. No one knew, or cared, who
he was or whence he came. He never gave account of himself, or spoke of
his own affairs. Curiosity was the one thing he resented. He enclosed
himself, so far as private matters were concerned, within the
fortifications of a reserve which no one had succeeded in penetrating.
Though he held a thousand confidences, he made none. In listening to the
experiences of others he never referred to his own, or even hinted
whether they had been sweet or bitter. He went on his silent way and
the world was the better for him.

In his bare sitting room he sat with his face between his hands. A girl
knelt on the floor beside him.
She was a remarkable girl. Wild, wayward, with all the passions brimful
with untamed vitality incapable of the common restraints. Her face was
neither beautiful, nor, perhaps, even pretty but Diana herself might
have envied the full, lithe figure, the free grace of her movements. She
was the creature of her desires knowing no laws that opposed them. A
Primitive Woman, from the dawn of the world.
Jim, she pleaded. Jim....
He made no movement.
Be a man, she whispered. Pull yourself together.
He put her away from him roughly.
I wish you d go, he said dully. I don t want you here.
Her face grew whiter. Her hands crept to him again. The light of a great
love was in her eyes.
Oh, Jim, she whispered, I know I m not like she was. I m not
beautiful. I m not wonderful. I haven t anything that she had. Oh, I
know all that ... so well.
He uncovered his face it was haggard and bloodless, the face of a man
in the throes of a mental hell and looked at her, almost with
revulsion.
You? he cried harshly. You...? You dare to name yourself to me in
the same breath with her? Get up, and look at yourself! He pointed to a
cracked mirror on the mantel piece. Look! he said hoarsely, thrusting
her away from him again. Do you see how coarse and heavy and rough you
are? She was light and delicate like a snowflake. She never seemed to
touch the ground. Your hair is like string your hands are large your
voice is harsh. Her hair was like silk gold silk in the sunshine. I
could see through her hands. Her voice was music. I want you to go. You
are in my way.
She sprang up, raging.
She never loved you! she cried. She never cared for you or even
thought of you! She wasn t fit to touch you to look at you!
His face was aflame.
Stop! he shouted.
I hate her! she declared fiercely. I hate her memory! I m glad she s
dead!
He lunged forward from his chair, and seized her. In his fury he nearly
struck her.
As God s above us, he panted, one more word.... His rage choked him.
The words jammed in his throat.
She wrenched herself free. His arms dropped to his sides. He reeled
dizzily.
You may do what you like to me, she cried passionately. I tell
you I m glad she s dead! She deserved to die. She was wicked and cruel.
I think God Himself destroyed her.
He sank back into his chair weakly. A sob shook him.
God did not destroy her, he said slowly. God never destroys. He only
builds. It is men and women who destroy.
There was a long silence. She came close to him again, all her anger
swallowed up in a great sympathy.
Jim, she asked softly ... was she so much to you?
He became suddenly rigid.
How did you come to know her? She wasn t your sort. She couldn t have
had anything in common with you. What have you to do with women like
that?
His eyes narrowed threateningly. Her questions had struck him into a new
alertness. She noticed that his knees were pressed together.
The papers said she only came to England two months ago for the first
time. It hasn t all happened since then. I know it hasn t. There must
have been something else. Something before. What was it?
He sat glaring at her locking and unlocking his hands.
It all happened since then, he said jerkily. I had never seen her
before. There was nothing else.
I don t believe it, Jim, she declared. You are hiding something.
He avoided her steady gaze.
Believe it or not, as you like, he retorted.
People say there is some secret in your life, she said. I believe
there is. And I believe it was her secret too.
He lunged forward again, in a fresh paroxysm of fury.
What is it to you? he cried shrilly or to any one? Why do you pry?
Suppose I have my secrets. They are no concern of yours. I give away my
money my life. Isn t it enough? What would you be what would any of
them be now but for me? I work day and night for others. Can t I keep
my soul to myself?
Jim, she said gently, I m not prying. I don t want to know your
secrets. I only wanted to make it lighter for you, if you d let me.
You can t make it lighter for me, he returned. No one can make it
lighter. I don t want to be interfered with. I want to be left alone.
What right have you to try to judge me?
Judge you? she echoed. Who could want to judge you? Why, you are the
noblest man in all the world. No one could do more good than you do.
Every man, woman, and child here worships you, and would die for you.
His anger instantly subsided.
Ah, yes! he said greedily tell me that. That s what I want to hear.
Tell me they worship me that no one could do more good than I do that
men and women would die for me. Go on telling me that!
Her voice thrilled with her love for him.
You brought us light and life. You have raised hundreds as you raised
me out of misery and filth. Think of all the children you have sent
away from this poison into the green fields and the sunshine who would
have died.
Yes! yes! he cried. Go on! Go on! All the children....
You are building them, she said her whole being transformed with
tenderness. You are making them fit to be men and women. They wouldn t
have been fit without you. You are teaching them how to be clean and
happy. You are showing them that they needn t be the dregs of
humanity that these hovels needn t be their world. You are giving them
new interests, new thoughts, new hopes. Oh, what could be more
wonderful more splendid? It is God s own work.
Yes! yes! he cried again. God s work! I am doing God s work!
He paced up and down the room eagerly feasting on her words drinking
her praises as an exhausted man might drink an invigorating draught. He
was in the grip of a feverish energy. His blood was racing.
His quick steps shook the wretched room. The floor creaked under his
tread. A lamp on the table rattled. The girl watched him nervously. She
put out a hand to check him, but he brushed it aside. His looks, his
movements, frightened her. He seemed to be gazing out beyond the narrow
walls into a space of surging memories, that sported with his reason. He
muttered incoherently, oblivious of her presence. She grew frightened.
Jim! she cried sharply.
He started, and stopped, looking at her vacantly.
My work, he said restlessly. I must get on with my work. I haven t
done enough ... nearly enough. I must go on building ... go on giving
light.
He let her put a hand on his arm and move him gently back to his chair.
He sat down, and stared at her in a dazed fashion, as one returning to
consciousness.
Why haven t you gone? he said heavily. I asked you to go.
I m not going, Jim, she returned. I can t leave you like this. You re
not fit to be left.
His face darkened again.
I am perfectly fit to be left, he said hardly. And I wish to be
alone.
When you are better, I ll go, she said quietly if you want me to.
He made a gesture of impatience.
I am better now, he said wearily. I am quite well. I want you to go.
Why do you persist in staying when I want you to go?
The girl s self control deserted her. She burst into a storm of weeping.
I won t go, she sobbed. I won t go because you are in trouble and I
love you. I don t care whether you want me or not. I love you.
He heard her indifferently. Neither her tears nor her passion moved him.
Don t talk nonsense, he snapped. Love is nothing to me. I hate the
word. You might as well talk of loving the Monument as me.
You lifted me up, she cried. You saved my soul and body. I was lower
than any of the others before you came. You taught me and I ve tried to
learn your lessons. But, oh, if you didn t mean me to love you, you
should have left me where I was.
You were a good girl, he said, with tired tolerance. You learnt
well. But I didn t mean you to love me. I don t want you to love me.
What I have done for you was only part of my work like the others. I
don t want any woman to love me. I tell you, I hate the word. It means
nothing to me. I only want to go on....
Her sobs ceased. She stood very still. Her face was torn, but he was not
looking at her. She turned, and went slowly towards the door, her head
bowed. She seemed to be shrunken and small. All her vitality had gone.
She moved like an old woman, weakly.
The door opened before she reached it. Two men stood in the passage. She
started back. One of them came a few paces into the room, looking at the
man in the chair.
Mr. James Layton?
He rose unsteadily.
Yes, he said, I am James Layton. What do you want?
We are police officers, investigating the murder of Miss Christine
Manderson.
The girl uttered a cry, and sprang between them.
What do you want with him? she demanded fiercely. He knows nothing
about it. How should he? What is it to do with him?
The men looked at her with quick interest. But Layton silenced her with
an imperative gesture.
I am at your service, he said quietly. What can I do for you?
We are instructed to ask you to be kind enough to return with us to
Scotland Yard to answer a few questions that may assist the
investigation of the crime.
Certainly, Layton returned, without hesitation.
His face was perfectly calm. He showed no fear or agitation.
We have a taxi waiting, the man said. He spoke to Layton but he was
looking at the girl.
I will come with you at once, Layton replied.
He took up his hat and stick. The girl leant against the wall panting, a
hand pressed to her heart.
Jim, she gasped faintly. Jim....
He turned, with the first sign of kindness he had yet shown to her.
Don t be frightened, he said gently. I shall be back in an hour or
so.
She clutched him desperately.
You sha n t go! she cried wildly. You sha n t go!
He put her aside firmly.
Why shouldn t I go? There is nothing to be afraid of. I must help if I
can.
The door closed behind them. The girl moved from the wall, and staggered
to the table, leaning on it heavily. She was ashen. Her lips were gray.
She heard them leave the house heard the car start, and listened until
the sound of it died away in the length of the street. Her strength
failed. She sank to her knees. A moan of agony escaped her.
For nothing.... she whispered. Oh, God ... for nothing....
She heard a quiet tap at the door, but could not answer. She saw the
door open slowly. An enormous figure stood on the threshold.
She struggled to her feet.
What do you want? she murmured fearfully. Have you come ... for me?
The figure squeezed its way through the narrow doorway, and closed the
door.
Mademoiselle, you are a friend of Mr. James Layton, who was taken, a
few minutes ago, to Scotland Yard?
Yes, she cried, yes. I am his friend. What is it?
Before the end of the day, Mr. Layton will be detained on the charge of
murder.
She screamed.
He didn t do it! He didn t do it!
The evidence is strong, said the stranger. He threatened her. He was
in the garden when the crime was committed
She raised her hand, as if to ward off a blow.
In the garden? she shivered. He was in the garden ... then?
He will require much assistance, continued the huge unknown and
there is no time to lose. Will you help him?
I would die for him, she choked. What can I do?
The stranger re opened the door.
Come with me, mademoiselle, he said softly and I will tell you.
CHAPTER XVI
A TRIPLE ALLIANCE
He led the girl out of the house. At the corner of the street a taxi was
waiting. He opened the door.
Where are we going? she demanded suspiciously.
To the Hotel Savoy, mademoiselle, he answered.
She hung back.
Why should I go with you? she asked defiantly. I have never seen you
before. I don t know who you are.
Mademoiselle, he replied, your friend is in great danger. He will not
be able to help himself. If you do not come with me, you will not be
able to help him. And I assure you that he needs your help.
She got in without another word. He placed himself beside her, and the
car started.
Who are you? she asked.
My name, he told her, is Dupont Victorien Dupont. I arrived in
London from Paris a few days ago.
What have you to do with this? she said doubtfully.
That, he replied, I cannot at the moment explain to you. I am
concerned in this case for reasons of my own, which must remain my own
for the present. I was in the garden when Christine Manderson was
killed.
She started, staring at him.
You were in the garden too? she cried.
I was, he affirmed. And I know that Monsieur Layton did not kill
her.
He didn t! she declared. He couldn t kill anything. He spends his
time giving life not taking it.
The police will be satisfied that he did, and they will have a strong
case. Unless we can help him by discovering the truth in time, he will
not be able to clear himself. Are you prepared to work for him?
I told you, she repeated passionately, I would die for him.
It is well, he said. There will be three people on his side. You my
friend, Mr. Tranter, who was also in the garden and myself. Together we
will save him. There will be separate tasks for us all. Mr. Tranter will
be waiting at the hotel when we arrive, and we will settle our plan of
campaign. Until then, mademoiselle, let us not refer to the subject
again. Do me the favor thoroughly to compose yourself. In these matters
coolness is of the utmost importance.
He compressed himself further into his corner, and closed his eyes. The
girl said nothing more. The rapidity of the whole catastrophe, and the
sudden appearance of this new adventure bewildered her. The huge
mysterious stranger almost frightened her. Though his eyes were shut and
he made neither sound nor movement, she felt that he was searching her,
that he was straining all his mental forces to steal the thoughts that
were throbbing through her mind. As they drew near to their destination,
she fiercely exerted the self control that was one of her least
developed virtues, and by the time they reached the Savoy, and Monsieur
Dupont opened his eyes, she was steady and watchful.
Mademoiselle, said Monsieur Dupont softly, you will be of the
greatest assistance. Already you know the value of silence.
In his private sitting room they found Tranter awaiting them.
My friend, said Monsieur Dupont, this lady will work with us. She is
much attached to James Layton, and her assistance will be most
valuable. He turned to her. Mademoiselle, I have not the honor....
My name s Jenny West, she said, comprehending the request.
Where is Layton? Tranter asked, as Monsieur Dupont placed a chair for
the girl, and sat down himself.
By this time, Monsieur Dupont replied, he will have arrived at
Scotland Yard. Our friend Inspector Fay will question him, and he will
certainly be detained. As I have just explained to mademoiselle, he is
in great danger. Unless we succeed in our object, his position is
without hope.
Tears welled up in the girl s eyes, but she checked them with an effort.
I wish, Monsieur Dupont continued, with careful emphasis, that my own
position also should be clearly understood, in so far as I am at liberty
to explain it. I cannot yet tell you how I come to be interested in this
affair. Soon I may do so but until then you must be content to take me
on trust, and to accept my assurance that I am fully qualified to direct
you. Are you willing to follow my instructions without question to save
this innocent man, who will be accused of a horrible crime which he did
not commit?
Yes, yes, the girl cried. I am ready. I will do anything.
And I, said Tranter.
The directions I give may seem to be strange, Monsieur Dupont went on
impressively but they must be followed. The errands on which I send
you may seem to be unimportant and even foolish but they must be
carried out. Do not look for explanations, until I make them. I give
account to no one. Those who work with me work much in the dark but
they reach the light. There must be no hesitation. Is that understood?
Again the others agreed.
Then, said Monsieur Dupont confidently, we shall succeed. Layton will
be saved but it will be a hard and difficult task. The first law I have
to impose on you is silence. Complete silence, to every one except
myself.
He turned to the girl.
At three o clock this afternoon, mademoiselle, unless you hear from me
to the contrary, you will go to Scotland Yard, where Mr. Layton will be
detained. That I shall verify by telephone. You will see him, and you
will tell him this: You will say that I, Dupont, know how and why
Christine Manderson died that I, and those with me, will not allow the
innocent to suffer and that he shall be delivered from this charge. And
say to him, also, anything from yourself that you may wish to say.
They were both gazing at him blankly.
You know? the girl gasped. You know who killed her?
The great Frenchman seemed to develop before their eyes into a figure
of tremendous menace, every inch of him alive with implacable,
relentless purpose.
I know, he declared slowly, just what I have told you how and why
she died. Ask me no more. Remember our conditions. There must be no
questions until the time comes.
He rose, and took an envelope from his pocket.
Certain things that I shall ask you to do, mademoiselle, may involve
expense. In this envelope you will find a sufficient sum. Do not
hesitate to accept it. Ample funds are at our command. When you return
from Scotland Yard, report to me here. If I am not in, wait for me. And,
above all, remember silence.
He opened the door, and bowed her out. Then he turned to Tranter with a
faint smile.
Well, my friend? he asked quietly.
Do you really mean, Tranter exclaimed, that you know the truth of the
crime?
Monsieur Dupont offered him a cigar, and lit one himself with great
composure.
I know just as much about the crime, my friend, as I have said. I
repeat I know how and why that unfortunate woman died. Who, or what,
caused her to die is another matter, which we are setting ourselves to
solve.
You are certain that Layton is innocent?
James Layton did not commit the crime, Monsieur Dupont returned
firmly. But he will be hanged for it if we are not in time.
Well, said Tranter, what is there for me to do?
For you, replied Monsieur Dupont, there is the most important task in
the case, so far. And the most dangerous. Within twenty four hours you
must discover, and bring to me here, the secret of the Crooked House.
Good Lord! Tranter exclaimed, taken aback, how on earth am I to do
that?
I do not know, Monsieur Dupont admitted. Nor have I any helpful
suggestions to make. The method of procedure I leave to you.
Housebreaking is entirely out of my province, Tranter objected. And
the secret of that house, if there is one, is likely to be very well
guarded.
Probably, agreed Monsieur Dupont. But the fact remains that before
the end of the next twenty four hours I must have that secret and you
are the person who must bring it to me.
Tranter took up his hat and stick, without further protest.
Very well, he said stoutly. I will do my best.
Monsieur Dupont looked at his watch.
It is one o clock, he said, opening the door. At one o clock
to morrow I shall be waiting for you in this room.
CHAPTER XVII
MR. GLUCKSTEIN IN CONFIDENCE
Mrs. Astley Rolfe invariably received her creditors in pink deshabille.
The financier, Mr. Solomon Gluckstein, original and senior
representative of John Brown Co., Jermyn Street, was particularly fond
of pink, and extremely susceptible to deshabille. Whiskey and soda,
personally prepared for him in sufficient strength by his charming
debtor, increased the fondness and the susceptibility.
Ma tear lady, said Mr. Gluckstein, with desperate firmness, I have
come on an unplethant errand.
Mrs. Astley Rolfe pouted petulantly.
Am I to have no peace? she complained, from an alluring attitude on a
couch. Isn t it enough to have gone through the last two days? Look at
me. I am a nervous wreck.
Then all women wouldth with to be nervouth wrecks, said Mr. Gluckstein
gallantly.
I believe that odious detective actually imagined at the beginning that
I might have murdered the poor girl.
Nonthenth, the financier assured her.
I have scarcely had any sleep, she went on reproachfully. It is a
wonder I am not thoroughly ill. And now you from whom I should have
expected consideration come here with a face like a rock, and announce
your intention to be unpleasant. If I didn t know you so well, I might
have believed you.
Mr. Gluckstein glanced towards the door, and drew his chair closer to
her.
Let us understand each other, he said deliberately. At the present
time you owe me a large thum of money.
Gospel truth, she admitted.
Very much more than you could pothibly pay, if I came down on you.
She uttered a sigh of relief.
At last you realize that! she exclaimed thankfully.
Also, continued Mr. Gluckstein, you owe money to various other
people.
Your veracity, she confessed, is beyond question.
Almosth ath much ath you owe to me.
Quite as much, she said cheerfully.
And you owe me, he continued twelve thousand poundth.
The first time I have looked the evil fully in the face, she
shuddered.
His small eyes regarded her intently.
The last half of that I lent to you on a certain understanding.
Understanding? she echoed languidly.
Yeth.
What did you understand?
That you intended to become engaged to George Copplesthone, who would
pay your debths when you married him.
A quick change swept over her. She became hard and calculating.
Well? she returned.
You have not become engaged to him.
No.
Some one elth became engaged to him.
Yes, she said calmly.
That doth not look, he concluded, like fulfillment of the
understanding.
Doesn t it? she retorted.
He glanced again at the door, and came still closer.
Lithen, he said slowly. I have been your friendth. I have done for
you what I would not have done for any one elth. I have treated you
fairly, and I have never prethed you.
She softened immediately.
You have been very kind to me, she said gratefully.
You muth be my friendth too. I muth tell you my thecret. Promith me
faithfully that you will keep it.
She looked at him in astonishment.
Certainly I will keep it, she agreed.
Five days ago, Mr. Gluckstein informed her painfully, my partner
abthconded, and left me almosth a ruined man.
Her face expressed genuine sympathy.
I am very sorry, she said feelingly. What a dreadful blow for you.
It ith unnethecessary to explain bithness details to you, the
financier proceeded. My working capital hath gone, and the fact thimply
is that I cannot carry on unleth he paused to give his words
additional emphasis, unleth you repay me my twelve thousand poundth in
full within two months.
Two months? she exclaimed blankly.
Two months, he repeatedly firmly. That ith the utmost time I can give
you. Have you any other means of raithing the money?
Not a ghost of one, she replied frankly. I might as well try to push
over the Marble Arch as raise a single thousand.
Then, he said steadily, if you do not marry Copplesthone I am a
bankrupt and a bankrupt I will not be.
I shall marry him, she said. I told you I should and I shall. You
will have your money.
I believed you, he returned. But another woman beat you.
She looked away from him.
Did she? she replied evenly.
There was silence for a moment.
When Copplesthone announthed his engagement to Mith Manderthon, the
financier went on, I stood ruined. I admit it. I stood ruined by your
defeat. That ith the thecret that you muth keep. I was sure that you had
no other means of paying me back. Nothing could save me but a
miraculouth removal of the obstacle.
The obstacle was removed, she said, in the same even tone.
He shuddered.
It wath. The obstacle that stood between you and Copplesthone, and me
and ruination, wath removed. It was a ghastly thing, and we are very
thorry. But let uth be candid. It wath to our advantage.
Yes, she agreed slowly it was to our advantage.
There must not be another obstacle, he said.
There will not be another, she replied. George Copplestone will marry
me and you shall have your twelve thousand pounds, as I promised. You
need not be anxious.
He looked round the luxurious room, and sighed deeply. It surprised her
that she had not noticed before how much he had aged.
I must begin again, he said. I am getting old but I will rebuild my
fortune. I will not be the only poor Jew in London.
You have been a good friend to me, she said gently. I am very sorry.
He paused to finish his drink, but his crafty eyes never left her face.
She did not meet them.
I wonder, he said, in a slightly lower tone, replacing his empty glass
on the table, what the police will discover.
I should imagine that there is very little to be discovered, she
returned. There seems no doubt that it was James Layton, the Mad
Millionaire, as he is called. He will probably be arrested within the
next twenty four hours. It appears to be a clear case. He threatened
her in front of us all. And he was in the garden.
It ought to be enough, he admitted, more easily. What more could they
want?
The evidence is very strong, she said, lazily settling her deshabille.
Many people have been hanged on less. Apparently the police are
satisfied. At least, they have not arrested either of us.
The financier started violently.
Either of uth? he cried, aghast. What do you mean, either of uth?
Her smile was enigmatical.
As you said just now the removal of the obstacle was to the advantage
of both of us.
But they don t know, he shivered. They can t know.
I hope not, she said shortly.
Perspiration began to stand out on his forehead. He had lost color
considerably.
You promised to keep my thecret, he exclaimed nervously. Noth a word
to any one.
I shall keep my promise, she replied.
There is no cause for alarm. I don t think Inspector Fay will trouble
us.
There was a tap at the door. They turned as the butler entered.
Inspector Fay would like to see you for a few minutes, madam.
They looked at each other. The financier was agitated. The woman was
perfectly calm.
Talk of the devil! she smiled.
Mr. Gluckstein gripped his hat, stick, and gloves, and rose hurriedly.
He must not see me here, he said jerkily. Let me out another way.
Go through there, she said, pointing to a door at the opposite end of
the room, and when he has come in, Parker will let you out. Bring the
inspector in, Parker.
The financier did not wait to shake hands.
Remember, he whispered passing her both your promises.
They will be kept, she said.
CHAPTER XVIII
THE WIT OF THE PINK LADY
Inspector Fay entered the room at one end a few seconds after Mr.
Gluckstein left it at the other.
Mrs. Astley Rolfe greeted him in a friendly fashion. She showed
considerable strain but, otherwise, was looking her best. And her best
was delightful.
Good morning, inspector, she said languidly.
Good morning, madam. He glanced back to make certain that the door was
closed. I trust you have recovered from the shock of the crime.
I still feel it very much, she replied, shuddering. It was the most
horrible experience I have ever had. To think of seeing that poor girl
alive and well one minute, and the next like that. It s too dreadful to
think of.
It was certainly a most disgusting crime, the inspector agreed.
I suppose it was James Layton?
I am afraid I cannot make any statement at present, he replied. Our
investigations are proceeding as quickly as possible. I hope we shall
clear it up in a few days.
I hope you will, she declared fervently. Such a brutal criminal can
expect no mercy.
In the meantime, continued the inspector, I should be much obliged if
you would kindly give me a little information.
Certainly, she said readily. Sit down.
He sat down, facing her. She made a charming picture. But Inspector Fay
had been taken in by charming women several times during the early part
of his career, and at this stage of it was as impervious as an oyster.
Please understand, he began, that in asking these questions I am
making no insinuations or suggestions of any kind. It is necessary to
establish certain facts.
I quite understand, she assured him. What do you want to know?
I want to know what you were saying to Mr. Copplestone in the garden,
before Mr. Tranter came to tell him that Miss Manderson had gone into
the house.
She started.
I? she exclaimed. I was not with Mr. Copplestone.
He remained silent.
I told you, I was not with any one. I did not feel quite myself, and
strolled about alone.
The inspector s face was quite impassive.
You wish me to accept that answer? he asked quietly.
She stiffened haughtily.
What do you mean? she said sharply.
I mean that you wish that answer to be accepted as the truth?
Of course. Are you suggesting that it is not?
I am suggesting nothing, he returned, with unruffled composure. But I
must tell you that if I am to accept that answer, it may have serious
consequences.
Serious consequences? she echoed, startled.
Yes.
For whom?
Possibly for Mr. Copplestone himself.
Signs of uneasiness began to appear, in spite of her wonderful
self control.
For Mr. Copplestone...?
For Mr. Copplestone, the inspector affirmed steadily.
I don t understand, she said. Will you kindly explain?
Certainly. His voice dropped slightly. Mr. Copplestone lied to me.
Lied to you?
Lied to me, he repeated. In accounting for himself, from the time he
came out into the garden after dinner until Mr. Tranter found him to
deliver Miss Manderson s message, he lied to me deliberately. I want to
know why.
You had better ask him, she retorted. I do not know.
Mr. Bolsover, the theatrical manager, told me that he found James
Layton lurking by the house, and called to Mr. Copplestone before
following him. Mr. Copplestone stated that the reason he did not hear
that call was that he had gone into the house to refill his
cigarette case, and did not come out again until just before Mr. Tranter
found him after leaving Miss Manderson. That statement was false.
How do you know? she asked quickly.
He did not go into the house to refill his cigarette case. He had had
no opportunity to smoke afterwards, and when I questioned him his case
was almost empty. He may have gone in for another reason or he may
not have gone in at all.
Is it not very trivial? she said.
If you had been dealing with crimes and criminals as long as I have,
the inspector returned, you would know that nothing is trivial. At
present, Mr. Copplestone s time while the crime was being committed is
unaccounted for and he is detected in a lie. It is not a pleasant
position to be in.
She was silent. Her hands moved nervously.
What is the use of telling me this? she asked.
It occurred to me, he replied, that you might be able to extricate
him from that position.
Why? she demanded resentfully.
He shrugged his shoulders.
Can you? he insisted, watching her closely.
For a moment she paused. There was malevolence in her gaze.
I do not know what he was doing, she said obstinately.
Madam, said the inspector impressively, if George Copplestone stood
in the dock in front of you, and his life depended on the truth of your
answer would it still be the same answer?
She turned on him.
In the dock? What do you mean?
Would it still be the same answer? he repeated sternly.
Do you suggest that he may have committed the crime? she exclaimed
contemptuously. Its absurd!
I told you, he said, I suggest nothing. My case must be complete. I
want to know the truth.
Silence followed. She plucked angrily at the lace edge of her gown.
Inspector Fay waited imperturbably.
He was with me, she said, at last, sullenly.
Thank you, said the inspector.
There was another pause.
Please go on, he pressed her.
She did not attempt to conceal her resentment at his insistence. But the
inspector s attitude was compelling.
We had a private conversation, she said viciously. What passed
between us concerned only ourselves.
I have no wish to pry into that, he told her. But I should like to
know why both you and Mr. Copplestone preferred to tell me a falsehood
rather than admit that you were talking together in the garden.
We had our reasons, she snapped, for not wishing it to be known that
we had been together. We had no time to speak privately after the crime
was discovered, and it evidently seemed best to both of us, rather than
risk conflicting statements, not to admit that we had spoken to each
other at all. I hope you have nothing more to ask me.
The inspector rose.
I have nothing more to ask you, madam, he said politely. I trust it
will not be necessary for me to trouble you again in this case. But if
it should be you will find that in such serious matters it is always
better to speak the truth. Good morning.
He walked quickly out of the room, leaving a lady in pink deshabille
quivering with an emotion that was not anger, but a new triumph.
CHAPTER XIX
DETAINED ON SUSPICION
Inspector Fay left the house of the lady in pink with a satisfied
expression on his face. At the corner of the street he hailed a taxi,
and drove to Scotland Yard.
Under the watchful eyes of his escort, James Layton awaited him. The
millionaire was perfectly composed, and appeared to be under no
apprehension as to the outcome of his visit. He accompanied the
inspector to a private room, and sat down in a comfortable chair without
the smallest sign of alarm.
Mr. James Layton? the inspector began, seating himself at a table.
Yes.
Mr. Layton, I am Inspector Fay in charge of the investigations of the
death of Miss Christine Manderson, at Richmond, on Tuesday night. I want
you to be good enough to answer the questions I have to ask you as
clearly as possible.
Certainly, the young man replied, unhesitatingly.
To begin with did you go to Richmond on that night?
I did.
Were you alone?
I was.
Did you call at Mr. Copplestone s house at half past eight?
Yes.
You asked to see Mr. Copplestone?
Yes.
And he refused to see you?
He did.
What was your object in calling on him, in that manner, at such an
inconvenient time?
I had just ascertained that Miss Manderson had, or was about to, become
engaged to marry him. My object was to tell him that he was not a fit
person to be her husband, and that I would prevent the marriage at all
costs.
That you would prevent the marriage?
Yes.
Because, in your opinion, he was unworthy of her?
Totally.
Had you any right to take upon yourself the control of Miss Manderson s
choice of a husband?
No right, perhaps as you use the term.
As any one would use it?
To my mind, yes.
To your mind you had a right to interfere in that engagement?
Yes.
We will come back to that presently, the inspector proceeded. What
did you do when Mr. Copplestone refused to see you?
I am afraid my excitement got the better of me. I forced my way past
the servant, and went into a room from which I heard voices, thinking
that he was there with her.
You knew, then, that she was in the house at the time?
Yes. I had previously telephoned to her hotel, and her maid had told me
that she was spending the evening at Copplestone s house.
I am told you burst into the room uttering her name.
Possibly.
But you found only some guests of Mr. Copplestone s, who had been
invited to dinner?
Yes.
Was there anything strange about the room?
It was decorated in an extraordinary manner.
I think you made some remark about the decorations?
Perhaps I did. I had been told something of Mr. Copplestone s
eccentricities, and I inferred that the engagement was an accomplished
fact, and that the decorations had been put up in celebration of it.
Do you remember saying anything else in the room?
I said that rather than allow Miss Manderson to be engaged to George
Copplestone, I would tear her to pieces with my own hands.
And utterly destroy her?
Yes.
A somewhat violent announcement, the inspector observed.
I am afraid it was.
You were in a state of great excitement, were you not?
I was very excited.
Almost beside yourself?
I cannot say that.
Were you responsible for your words and actions at the time?
Perfectly.
You really meant what you said?
I meant what I said, the young man declared calmly.
The inspector was writing rapidly.
You were then requested to leave the house, and I think you left quite
quietly?
Yes.
What did you do then?
I climbed over the wall into the garden and waited for an opportunity
to get into the house again and speak to Copplestone or Miss Manderson.
You were behaving rather strangely, were you not, Mr. Layton? the
inspector asked.
I suppose I was.
If you had heard of any one else acting in the same way, you would have
thought that he could hardly have been in a normal state of mind?
I expect I should.
Yet you say you were quite yourself?
I was quite myself.
And prepared to carry out your threat?
I do not know what I was prepared to do. I did not carry it out.
Later on, one of the guests, Mr. Bolsover, found you creeping round the
house towards an open window?
Yes.
Before he ran after you, do you remember hearing him call to Mr.
Copplestone?
Yes, he did.
Was there any answer?
I did not hear one.
Mr. Bolsover then followed you out in the direction in which the crime
was committed?
I do not know where the crime was committed, Layton replied firmly.
I know nothing of the crime.
Whoever committed it managed to fulfill your own threat fairly fully.
Unfortunately, yes.
Have you any suggestion to make as to who that person may have been?
No.
What, then, did you do when Mr. Bolsover ran after you?
I eluded him in the darkness, climbed over the wall again, and went
away.
Without having fulfilled your object?
Yes.
Had you seen anything at all of Miss Manderson, or Mr. Copplestone?
Nothing.
There was a pause. James Layton waited quietly while the inspector
finished off his notes. His face was a trifle paler than before, but he
betrayed no sign of agitation.
Now, resumed the inspector, let us go back. You said that to your
mind you had a right to interfere in Miss Manderson s engagement?
I did.
What had given you that right?
I am sorry, the young man returned courteously but I decline to
answer that question.
When and where did you first meet her?
I cannot tell you.
You would be wiser to do so.
Possibly.
The inspector s face darkened.
Mr. Layton, he said, with unmistakable emphasis, you had better not
decline to answer any question. I must warn you that your position may
become extremely serious.
I am afraid, Layton remarked quietly, that you have already made up
your mind that I am guilty of the crime.
That is as it may be, replied the inspector. I am advising you for
your own good. To refuse to answer questions is not the way to allay
suspicion but to increase it.
I realize that, the young man said. But I still refuse.
Inspector Fay leant back in his chair patiently.
Come, Mr. Layton, you will only put us to the trouble and delay of
proving what you might as well tell us at once. And it will do you no
good.
I should be sorry to cause you any additional trouble, Layton replied.
But I have my reasons.
Let me help you, continued the inspector. I have had inquiries made
at Miss Manderson s hotel, at the theater at which she was to have
appeared, of her maid, and various other sources. We have got her time
pretty well accounted for. It seems that you have not seen her at all
since she arrived in this country two months ago. Is that so?
There was no answer.
Anyway, if you did see her once or twice, there were certainly no
opportunities for anything to develop between you to account for your
behavior, or justify to the right to which you considered yourself
entitled. You must have known her before.
Layton was still silent. The inspector continued easily.
I am wondering whether a cable across the Atlantic would bring me a
description of a certain Michael Cranbourne, once well known in the
United States particularly in Chicago son of a multi millionaire.
James Layton stiffened in his chair. He had become white and tense.
A large part in the career of Michael Cranbourne was played by an
adventuress named Thea Colville said, at one time, to have been the
most beautiful woman in America and known later, on the stage in New
York, as Christine Manderson.
The young man rose. On his face there was a wonderful new dignity and
calm a relief, as if some heavy burden had dropped from him and left
him free.
Yes, he said quietly, I am Michael Cranbourne. I might have admitted
it at first. What do you want now?
The whole story, the inspector replied, motioning him back to his
chair.
I will tell you, he said.
He sat down again. A great contentment seemed to rest upon him, as on
one who reaches the end of a difficult and tiring journey. There was a
long pause.
I first met Thea Colville, he began, at last, in Chicago, when I was
twenty five seven years ago. She was twenty. It would be no use
attempting to give you an idea of what she was like. You never saw her
alive. No description could convey an impression of her beauty of her
awful fascination. From the moment I first saw her there was no other
woman in my world. I was engaged to be married, but I put an end to it.
People said I behaved badly, but I didn t care. I couldn t look at, or
think of, another woman after I had seen her. She enslaved me. I was
hers, body and soul. She held me helpless. I was only one of many, but I
was a favored one at least, I thought so.
He told his story slowly, in a low voice, without emotion. He was
staring out straight in front of him, forgetful of his surroundings and
his listener. The past held him.
My family warned me, and threatened me. I knew they were telling me the
truth but I wouldn t listen. I hadn t been brought up to care what
results my actions brought on other people. I thought only of myself of
the indulgence of my own desires. I lived a useless, contemptible
life entirely without scruples or restraints. There was scarcely a vice
that I was not steeped in hardly a sin that I had not explored. I had
enough money to gratify all my senses. Nothing was beneath me. I plunged
into every depravity. I made new depths for myself. He clenched his
hands. And I led others after me.
There was another pause. He sat rigid. The inspector waited patiently.
I need not trouble you with unnecessary details, the low voice went
on. It is enough that for her sake I sacrificed all my prospects I
threw away my heritage. To keep her for myself I squandered every cent I
could lay my hands on. I robbed my own brother. I forged my father s
name. I did ... other things. It was only the generosity of my family
that kept me from gaol. And Thea threw me over.
Apparently, the inspector remarked, not unsympathetically, her
standard of morality was on a somewhat similar level.
She is dead, said the young man gently. De mortuis nil nisi
bonum.
The inspector shrugged his shoulders.
As you please, he said. Go on.
She refused to see me to have anything more to do with me. She cut me
out of her life with one stroke. For the first time I knew she hadn t
cared. That broke me. I was very ill. For a year I knew no one. I
couldn t hear or speak. They fed me like a child. They thought I was
mad his eyes began to gleam unnaturally, his words quickened but in
reality I was in the presence of God. I was in the image I had brought
upon my soul black, hideous, distorted, reeking with the filth of my
sins. I saw myself in all the degradation I had brought upon the Shape
of God. I saw my own page in the Book of Life. All the entries were on
the debit side. The credit side was bare. I waited for damnation but
there is no damnation. There is only Building. I went out from the
presence of God a Builder.
His face was transformed. His voice rang with triumph with the pride of
victory.
I came to myself. It was like waking from the dead. It was a long time
before I recovered even a little of my strength. Every hand was against
me except my mother s. She stood by me. When she died, a year later, I
inherited the whole of her fortune. The others tried to take it away
from me, but I fought them. I had new uses for the money. I came over to
this country, and began my work. For four years I have given myself and
all I have. Go and see for yourself what I have done. Go and see the
men, women, and children who would die for me. Go and hear them bless my
name. Hear of the lives I have built the light I have brought. I have
filled up my credit side. I have a balance in hand in the Book of Life.
Inspector Fay remained silent. He was a severely practical man. Before
his mind there was only the outcome of the interview. The young man
controlled himself with an effort. His excitement passed. He was again
quiet and composed.
None of my old passions or inclinations remained except my love for
Thea. I couldn t crush it. I fought against it with all my strength. I
struggled to stamp it out, but it was unconquerable. Her face was always
in front of me, day and night. Her voice was always in my ears. I
couldn t escape. I heard nothing more of her until about six weeks ago,
when I saw a photograph of her in one of the papers under the name of
Christine Manderson, with a statement that she had arrived in London to
play at the Imperial Theater. The longing to see her again was too
strong for me. Day after day I waited outside the stage door of the
theater until she came, in all her fatal, maddening beauty. We stood
facing each other ... and she passed me by without a word.
His voice broke. He pressed his thin hands together.
The madness came over me again. The sight of her fanned all the old
flames. I was on fire. I tried to follow her, but they kept me out. I
wrote to her that night, telling her what I had done, how I had
suffered, and begging, imploring her to let me see her. The answer was
a curt note, in the third person, saying that she declined to receive
any communication from me whatsoever.
Again he paused. The inspector made no comment.
I found out where she was staying, what her plans were, and who were
her friends. I discovered that she had come under the influence of
George Copplestone, who is little better than I was once. The thought
that she was to be the sport of his depravity drove me to frenzy. I
neglected my work. I could do nothing. Then I heard that they were on
the point of becoming engaged. The rest you know. I followed her to
Copplestone s house. She had evidently warned him against me. I forced
my way into the room, calling her by the name of Christine
Why? the inspector asked
Because it was obvious that she would not wish the name of Thea
Colville to be known to London. That is all I have to tell you.
The inspector rose.
Mr. Cranbourne, he said formally, after hearing your story, I am
afraid I have no option but to detain you on suspicion of having caused
the death of Christine Manderson, otherwise Thea Colville, and to warn
you that anything you say may be used in evidence against you.
The young man heard him without a tremor.
I did not kill her, he said firmly. God s will be done.
CHAPTER XX
THE BIRTH OF THE KILLER
Monsieur Dupont was one of those fortunate individuals who can sleep in
a train.
He left Paddington at one o clock, and slept for an hour, a sleep of
childlike ease and innocence. When he woke the train was within five
minutes of his destination. He alighted at a small country station, and
instituted inquiries for a conveyance.
Twenty minutes later, an unimpressionable horse, attached to a hybrid
vehicle, was jogging him along country lanes which would have delighted
a man with less serious purposes. But Monsieur Dupont was too much
occupied with the uglinesses of humanity to heed the beauties of nature.
It was not until they arrived at the outskirts of a small village that
he began to look about him with interest.
It was a lovely spot, nestling in primeval innocence under the shelter
of protecting hills. Monsieur Dupont uttered a heavy sigh, and spoke,
for the first time during the drive, to the stout, sunburnt lad who
conducted the equipage.
My friend, he said sorrowfully, who could imagine that such a corner
of heaven could have been the cradle of one of the most terrible
tragedies of the world? I feel like a purveyor of sins, creeping into
the preserves of God.
The startled stare that confronted him was not helpful to further
conversation. The disconcerted youth vigorously obtained fresh impetus
from their source of progress, and drew up at length, with obvious
relief, before a low, creeper covered house, lying in a nest of flowers.
Monsieur Dupont s gentle knock produced a rubicund housekeeper, of about
eighty, who blended in perfect harmony with the house, the creeper, and
the flowers.
Doctor Lessing, if you please, madame, said Monsieur Dupont.
He was shown into a small library, opening on to the garden. The room
was flooded with sunshine. There were flowers everywhere.
Mon Dieu , said Monsieur Dupont, aloud, that I should come to ask
such questions here.
He turned as the door opened, and bowed before a sturdy, white haired
old man, bronzed with the health of the country.
Monsieur Dupont? said the doctor. What can I do for you?
Monsieur Dupont took a letter from his pocket, and unfolded it.
Monsieur, I beg you to read this letter. It is from the French Embassy,
and begs assistance to me in an investigation that I am making.
Doctor Lessing read the letter, and returned it.
I shall be happy to assist you in any way I can, he said, courteously.
Please sit down.
Monsieur Dupont sat down by the open windows and drank in the fragrance
of the garden.
Doctor Lessing, he began, I believe it is for a long time that you
have lived in this beautiful place?
For forty five years, the old doctor smiled contentedly. But I am by
no means one of its oldest inhabitants. Lives are long in the country.
To what period do you wish to refer?
A period, Monsieur Dupont replied, nearly forty years ago. I do not
know exactly.
A long stretch, said Doctor Lessing ruefully. But my memory shall do
its best for you. That is all I can promise.
I am engaged, said Monsieur Dupont, on an extraordinary quest. I do
not think that any human being has ever been engaged on a more
extraordinary quest.
A pleasant one, I trust, said the doctor.
As much to the contrary as it is possible to imagine.
The doctor murmured a regret and waited for his huge visitor to
continue.
Do you, Monsieur Dupont inquired, recollect the name of Winslowe?
Doctor Lessing started slightly.
Winslowe?
Oscar Winslowe.
A keen glance flashed from the doctor s eyes.
Yes, he said quickly, I recollect the name.
He lived, I think in this village at the time I have said?
Yes. The reply was a trifle curt.
Perhaps, Monsieur Dupont proceeded evenly, there were circumstances
in connection with that name which helped to fix it in your memory?
There were certain circumstances, the doctor admitted, which made it
a name that I am unlikely to forget.
Unpleasant circumstances? queried Monsieur Dupont.
The most unpleasant that have ever occurred to me in the whole length
of my practice.
It is for that story, said Monsieur Dupont, that I have come to ask.
May I beg all the details that you can recall?
Perhaps you will first tell me, the doctor returned, for what purpose
you require this information?
I require it, Monsieur Dupont replied impressively, to save the life
of an innocent man, who is wrongly accused of the crime of murder. I
require it also prove three deaths, and possibly to prevent another
three.
Again the doctor started. His hands gripped the arms of his chair.
Three deaths? he exclaimed sharply. What do you mean?
Three deaths, repeated Monsieur Dupont. Of three very beautiful
women.
The doctor sprang to his feet.
My God! he cried hoarsely.
Will you tell me the story? said Monsieur Dupont.
Doctor Lessing sat down again in his chair. He was considerably shaken.
He leant back and closed his eyes, remaining silent for a few moments.
I think, he began at last, that I can, at all events, remember the
chief facts of the case. It was such a remarkable and distressing one
that it stands out in the annals of such a peaceful spot as this, and it
has therefore remained in my memory, though so much else has faded. But
you must make allowances for the flight of time. Look out of the window
to the left, and you will see a large red house, on the slope of the
hill.
I see it, said Monsieur Dupont, following the direction.
That was Oscar Winslowe s house, forty years ago. Winslowe was an
unprincipled and dissolute man. He was only about twenty five or six at
that time, but already he was sodden with drink, drugs, and vice of
every description. He was the worst kind of blackguard. But his wife was
the exact opposite to him, a gentle, delicate girl. She was not
beautiful, but her nature more than compensated for lack of beauty. He
had married her for her money, and treated her abominably. I became
friendly with her, partly because of the pity I felt for her on account
of his treatment, and partly because I sincerely admired the beauty of
her character. In consequence of that friendship, I undertook to watch
over her entry into motherhood.
That is what I want, said Monsieur Dupont. Her entry into
motherhood.
The more I saw of her, continued the doctor, the greater grew my
pity. There have been wonderful women in the world who have made history
by their patience and endurance but this woman was one of those,
equally brave and equally patient, of whom history knows nothing. She
worshipped her husband, blindly, dumbly as an animal will still love
the man or woman who ill treats it. She never uttered a word of
complaint or blame. Her greatest hope was that the advent of the child
would induce from him something of the consideration and tenderness that
he had never given her. She believed it was some fault, some
shortcoming, of hers that had kept it from her. It didn t occur to her
that it might be the beauty of another woman.
Ah! said Monsieur Dupont eagerly.
She discovered that about three months before the child was born. I
can t remember how the discovery came about. She followed him to
London and found him, even that short time before the birth of his
child, lavishing on a beautiful society woman all that should have been
hers.
In spite of the years that had passed the doctor s voice still rose in
anger. He paused, checking himself.
Before that supreme insult, that shattering of her hopes, the poor girl
lost her reason. In the state of her health, it was not surprising. She,
who would never have harmed a fly, who had never wished ill to any one
in her life, became possessed with an awful fury to stamp out the beauty
that had robbed her to destroy the face and body that were more to the
man she loved than her own. The other woman, undeserving of
consideration as she was, narrowly escaped a horrible punishment. The
unfortunate girl was brought back here, and I was sent for to attend
her. She grew worse hour after hour. Her mind was completely unhinged.
From a furious hatred of the beauty of the woman who had wronged her,
the mania increased into a furious hatred of beauty in any shape or
form, and a savage lust to destroy it. In the house there were many
portraits of the beautiful women of the Winslowe family. She tore the
pictures to shreds. There were statues and valuable works of art. She
smashed them all to pulp. Her madness was the most terrible thing I
have ever seen. She had to be forcibly restrained.
Monsieur Dupont listened intently. There was an expression of triumph on
his face.
A pitiful story, he said softly.
She partially recovered in a few weeks, the doctor went on, and
before the three months were up her reason, if not actually sound again,
was at least restored. But she was a wreck of a woman. There was
darkness all round her. She heard nothing more of Winslowe. He never
came back to the house. The madness returned when she gave birth to her
child, and she died in an asylum a fortnight afterwards.
A longer pause followed. The recitation of his memories moved the good
old doctor as the actual experience must have moved the young man of
forty years before. He rose, and walked to the window, sniffing the
scent of the flowers with relief.
She left the care of the child to the nurse who was devoted to her,
with ample funds for its future. When the affairs were settled up, the
nurse took the child away with her, and I have not seen her since.
He made a relieved gesture.
That is the whole story, he said.
The nurse, inquired Monsieur Dupont, what was her name?
Masters. Miss Elizabeth Masters.
Is she still alive?
So far as I know she is, the doctor replied. But I should not have
been likely to have heard of her death, if it had taken place.
Can you assist me to discover her address?
She wrote to me periodically, Doctor Lessing returned. She was an
excellent nurse, and I got her some cases in town. But it is a long time
since I last heard from her. There may be one or two old letters of hers
in my desk. If you will excuse me for a moment, I will see if I can find
them for you.
He left the room. Monsieur Dupont turned to the window, and gazed
dreamily out into the sunshine.
And so, he muttered in this corner of paradise the Destroyer was
born.
CHAPTER XXI
A HASTY FLIGHT
Doctor Lessing re entered the room with a letter in his hand.
The last address I can find, he said, is 35, De Vere Terrace,
Streatham. That is sixteen years old, but as it tells me that she had
only just moved in, you might find her still there.
Monsieur Dupont made a note of the address.
There remains only one question, he said, replacing his pocket book.
Can you tell me the name of the child?
The doctor shook his head.
I m afraid I can t. The child was christened in the church here, but I
was away at the time, and when I returned Miss Masters had gone to
London.
It is very important, said Monsieur Dupont. Perhaps I can discover
it at the church?
You will not find any one to tell you at this time, the doctor
replied. But, if you will leave me your address, I will send over to
the parsonage this evening and ask Mr. Wickham to turn it up in the
register, and let you know.
Monsieur Dupont delivered himself of profuse thanks. Five minutes later
he had taken leave of the old doctor, and was returning to the station
under the guidance of the sunburnt youth, who was obviously relieved
when the expedition terminated.
He slept peacefully until the train reached Paddington.
It was five o clock when he returned to the Savoy. The girl, Jenny West,
was waiting for him. She was as white as death.
They have charged him, she sobbed. He is remanded for a week.
He laid a hand gently on her shoulder.
Do not be afraid, he said. He will be saved. I have given my
word the word of Dupont that he will be saved.
He sat down at his writing table, and wrote rapidly for several minutes.
He covered four or five sheets of paper, and placed them in an envelope.
Here, mademoiselle, he said, rising, are your instructions for
to morrow morning. Do not read them until you are alone. A car will be
waiting for you here at ten o clock in the morning. In the afternoon you
will be at liberty to visit Monsieur Layton. I shall expect to see you
here at one o clock.
He bowed her out of the room. Half an hour later, he was on his way to
Streatham.

A grim expression settled on his face as the journey proceeded, yet it
was not altogether unmixed with pity. He was a man of ready sympathy.
The doctor s story had evidently moved him to view his task with a new
compassion.
As his car turned into De Vere Terrace, he became alert, and scrutinized
the houses closely. They were small semi detached villas. He alighted in
front of number 35, passed up the carefully kept front garden, and
knocked at the door.
There was no response. He knocked again, several times, but the silence
of the house remained undisturbed. He left the door, and glanced in at
the front windows, but the room was so dark that he could discern
nothing. He walked round to the back. Through the uncurtained kitchen
windows he saw a fire in the range. It had almost burnt itself out.
There were cooking utensils on the table. Some pastry was rolled out on
a board. Apparently the household operations had been somewhat rudely
interrupted, and very hastily abandoned. The back door and windows were
securely fastened. Returning to the front, he carefully closed the gate,
and knocked at the door of the adjoining house.
The name of the house was Sans Souci, and the door was opened by a
lady in rich purple, with a string of pearls.
Monsieur Dupont swept off his hat.
Madame, I make a thousand apologies! Can you tell me when I shall find
Miss Masters at home.
His extreme bulk and the fact that he was not an Englishman seemed to
cause the lady considerable amusement.
I m sure I don t know, she said engagingly. I think she s gone away.
Away? Monsieur Dupont echoed.
She left in a great hurry two hours ago, the lady informed him. In a
motor.
Monsieur Dupont appeared somewhat staggered.
Two hours ago.... he muttered.
I heard a noise going on in the house, continued the lady, as if she
was packing quickly. She went off with a couple of boxes, and seemed
very impatient.
It is most unfortunate, said Monsieur Dupont mildly. I have come all
the way from the Strand to see her.
The lady laughed freely.
I m very sorry, she said good naturedly. Won t you come in and rest a
bit?
Madame, he said, you are very good, but I must return to the Strand.
Would you allow me to ask you some questions, without finding me
impertinent?
What are they? she asked.
Will you tell me if any particular person was in the habit of visiting
Miss Masters?
The lady stiffened slightly.
Are you a friend of Miss Masters? she inquired, shortly.
I am not, Monsieur Dupont admitted frankly. I have never seen her. It
is a few hours ago that I heard her name for the first time.
I really cannot answer any questions to a stranger, said the lady
stiffly. I don t know you.
Monsieur Dupont bowed.
If you did, madame, he said, I should be the proudest of men. Do me
the favor to read this letter.
He produced the letter from the French Embassy, and handed it to her.
She read it, and was duly impressed.
Of course I ll do anything for the French Embassy, she said, returning
the letter with dignity. Miss Masters wasn t what you might call a
friend of mine. I used to speak to her because she lived in the next
house, but it didn t go beyond that. She kept very much to herself. I
don t want to say anything at all unkind, but very few ladies in our set
knew her. Of course it wasn t her fault, but she was not exactly classy.
And when one lives in a neighborhood like this, it s class that tells.
Monsieur Dupont bowed again.
Obviously, madame, he said.
The only person that used to visit her, continued the gratified lady,
was a man who often used to arrive in the evening and stay the night.
We understood she was an old nurse of his, or something of the kind, and
that he more or less provided for her.
And this man, madame what was he like?
He was rather tall, she said, and had a dark moustache. He was always
well dressed, and looked quite a gentleman.
You heard his name?
No we never heard his name. I did tell my house parlor maid to try to
find out once, but she couldn t. Miss Masters actually accused me of
prying.
Mon Dieu , said Monsieur Dupont.
We had a bit of a row, said the lady candidly.
Does she live alone, madame?
Yes, quite alone. She does everything for herself.
My last question, said Monsieur Dupont, may seem remarkable. It is
this. Have strange things appeared to be happening in the house during
the visits of the tall gentleman with the dark moustache?
She started, looking at him curiously.
Strange things? she repeated slowly.
Perhaps violent things.
Well, that s queer, she exclaimed. As a matter of fact, we once heard
the most extraordinary noises going on when he was there. My husband
thought of sending in to ask if anything was the matter.
What kind of noises, madame?
Like as it might be heavy things being thrown about and smashed, said
the lady elegantly.
Monsieur Dupont swept off his hat again.
Thank you, madame, he said and went back to his car.
CHAPTER XXII
TRANTER ATTACKS THE CROOKED HOUSE
In the evening, Tranter set off to the Crooked House.
It was dark when he reached it, and the roads were empty. Through the
open lodge gates he slipped into the garden unseen. The place seemed
deserted. The front of the house showed not a glimmer of light. The
whole ugly shape of it stood out gauntly against the sky of the summer
night. In the shadow of the trees, he stood watching it, alert to detect
a sign of life. But no such sign appeared. The Crooked House was as dark
and silent as a tomb.
He crept nearer, keeping under cover of the trees, and skirted the lawns
to the back of the house. There, also, darkness reigned. No sound
disturbed the stillness. Facing him were the dark shapes of the trees
surrounding the wing of the house which extended from the opposite
corner. The foliage was so dense that no part of the wing itself was
visible. He moved quickly across the back of the house, and reached the
trees. As he passed under them, it seemed that he was feeling his way
among monstrous sentinels of a dark mystery.
A thick hedge loomed up in front of him. It appeared to surround the
entire wing. He walked round, trying to find a place thin enough to
allow him to push his way through but the hedge was evidently there for
the express purpose of defeating such an intention. It was impossible to
penetrate it, to creep under it, or to climb over it. At the extremity
of the wing, about which the trees were thickest, he saw a faint light,
escaping round the edge of a blind.
He stopped beneath it. It was a meager, unpleasant light, too dim to be
of any greater use in the room than to afford the barest relief from
complete darkness. The window was half overgrown with ivy, and he could
see that it was filthily dirty. The light continually flickered, and
once or twice it seemed to have died out altogether. An eerie sensation
began to possess him. He felt very strongly the evil influence of the
house. Curiosity to discover what sinister secret it really harbored
increased and nerved him.
Again he tried to force a way through the hedge, but everywhere it was
an impassable barrier. Slowly and noiselessly he worked his way round
the wing, only to find it completely enclosed on all sides. He returned,
and stood looking up at the window. Either the light was brighter, or
the gap at the edge of the blind had widened. He thought he saw a faint
shadow pass and re pass.
It was not until, in moving to one side, he struck his head against a
massive bough of one of the great trees that the possibility of
utilizing them as a means of access to the forbidden enclosure occurred
to him. He examined the bough. It extended well over the hedge, and
would form a perfectly secure bridge. By creeping a few feet along it,
he would be able to drop down on the other side of the hedge. Finding
the main trunk, he tested his weight on a smaller bough, and swung
himself up into the tree.
A few minutes later he stood within the barrier. The window was some
twelve or fifteen feet above him. But the walls were thickly clad with
ivy, and ivy is an excellent ladder. Carefully he began to climb.
He reached the window, found himself a secure footing, and peered round
the edge of the blind. But the light was so poor, and the panes were so
dirty, on both sides, that had there been anything to see he could have
been very little the wiser. As it was, the small area of the room into
which he could dimly peer seemed to be carpetless and unfurnished. There
was no movement, no sound. The light itself apparently came from the
further end of the room, from the level of a table. He clung on,
undecided how to proceed. It appeared that the only thing to do was to
wait and listen for some indication of the purpose of the dismal
illumination.
He looked at his watch. It was ten thirty. After a wait of what seemed
at least half an hour, he looked again. Ten minutes only had passed. No
discernible movement had taken place in the room. Yet he felt perfectly,
and very unpleasantly, certain that it was occupied that something was
proceeding within it which, had the blind not intervened, would have
revealed the secret of the house. Of what it might be he could form no
idea but, for the first time in his life, he was experiencing, in his
mental tenseness and the sinister silence of the surroundings, that
sensation which attests a proximity to evil. He was daunted. Fear was a
condition to which he was a stranger, but a vivid nervousness was
beginning to seize upon him. A sense of personal danger, an element
which, so far, he had scarcely considered, was attacking him, and
gaining ground. The perspiration was standing out on his face. He found
that his hands were cold and wet. The pulses of his body were throbbing;
he felt his strength growing less. Muttering a curse, he braced himself
with a strong effort. He was accustomed to consider his nerves
impregnable. Many times in his life he had known himself to be in far
greater danger than he could attribute to the present situation, and
such weakness had never assailed him. On four occasions he had been
aware that his life was hanging by a thread, and had gloried in his own
coolness. And now ... without a doubt the Crooked House was evil.
Still he waited. Another twenty minutes slowly passed.
He started. His hands closed tightly on the trunk of the ivy to which he
was clinging. The door of the room had been closed with a slam. He could
hear heavy footsteps on the uncarpeted floor. A shadow blotted out the
light.
A moment later, a voice a man s voice, horribly strained and
unnatural rose in a shout of fury.
Damn you! it screamed. Look at your work! Look at it again! Open your
rotten eyes and look! Look! Look!
Tranter was so startled that he almost lost his footing on the ivy.
There was no mistaking the voice it was the scream of madness. He
listened for an answer, but there was no sound in response. Then the
same voice laughed a laugh of awful bitterness.
Are you satisfied? The thing is creeping on. I am getting nearer to
you hour by hour. I am more like you to night. One more grain went
yesterday another to day. Another will go to morrow.... Again the
voice rose to a shriek of rage and hatred. Oh, God! There is no hope!
No hope! Only on and on to that!
The words trailed off into a sob of agony. Still Tranter could hear no
reply.
Silence followed. The shadow again blotted out the light; then sprang
aside, and the voice burst out into a fresh paroxysm of madness, yelling
a stream of curses at the object of its fury. The madman s frenzy was
utterly revolting to listen to, but Tranter searched it closely for some
clue to the identity of the person, or thing, to whom it was addressed.
The voice rose again to a shriek; then subsided as before into a feeble
wail of misery.
Oh God! it moaned is there no way ... no way? No road but that road?
No end but that end? Oh God, have mercy ... have mercy....
It was a cry of unspeakable anguish the prayer of a soul in torment. It
seemed to Tranter that the speaker had thrown himself down, and was
beating the floor with his hands.
There was silence again. Then, for the first time, Tranter became aware
of another presence in the room. Though he could neither see nor hear
anything, he was conscious of a new, indefinable movement. For a moment
horror almost overcame him. He trembled. His nerves failed. The support
of the ivy seemed to be giving way under him. He clutched at the
framework of the window itself.
The shadow of a figure leapt up from the floor and bounded to the
window. The blind was wrenched aside, the window thrown open, and before
Tranter had time to recover himself or attempt to escape, the livid,
distorted face of George Copplestone was almost touching his own.
A hand closed on his throat in a murderous grip, another seized his
wrist. In spite of his frantic struggles, he was dragged with superhuman
strength through the window into the room.
CHAPTER XXIII
A DUEL
On the afternoon of the same day, an hour after the departure of
Inspector Fay, Mrs. Astley Rolfe had sped herself to Richmond, in a
luxurious motor car, which was her s through the instrumentality of Mr.
Gluckstein.
She had found the house of George Copplestone plunged into the darkness
of a house of mourning. Every blind was drawn. Every particle of color
had been removed or draped. Black reigned supreme.
Copplestone was not pleased to see her, and made no attempt to assume
the contrary. He was sitting in his library, moody and melancholy, still
in the half dazed condition into which the death of Christine Manderson
had cast him. His face was drawn, haggard, and sickly; his eyes were
bloodshot. He looked up at her with a forbidding frown, and did not
move from his chair.
Well? he said curtly.
She waved a hand round the black room.
Isn t this ... a trifle theatrical? she asked coolly.
He said nothing. She sat down opposite to him uninvited. She was
perfectly self possessed.
Inspector Fay was kind enough to call on me this morning, she remarked
pleasantly.
Again there was no reply.
He may not be an example of dagger like intelligence, she continued,
looking at him steadily but he is just a little too sharp to play
with.
He scowled at her.
Have you come to tell me that? he asked rudely.
That and other things, she returned unruffled.
I don t want to hear them, he retorted.
They concern you, she said rather closely.
I don t want to hear them, he repeated.
Her lips tightened.
It is scarcely pleasant to be such an obviously unwelcome visitor, she
said evenly. But I am afraid you must listen.
I am not in the humor to talk to you, he declared roughly. I don t
want to talk to any one. I want to be left alone. Isn t it enough to be
pestered by the police and the papers, and all the damnable business for
the inquest? Don t you see that my house is in mourning? Can t you let
me be even for a few days?
If I had let you be, she replied easily, Inspector Fay would probably
be here in my place with much less pleasant intentions.
His glance sharpened.
What do you mean? he growled.
You were not wise, she proceeded tranquilly, to treat his mental
capabilities with quite so much contempt. They are possibly not
startlingly brilliant, and he is perfectly easy to deceive. But even an
official detective can see through a clumsy lie.
Uneasiness flashed across his face. She smiled slightly.
And I am afraid, my friend, that you are a clumsy liar.
I don t know what you are talking about, he snapped.
Come, she said quietly however freely we may trifle with the very
much overrated Arm of the Law, at least let us be honest with each
other. For some reason or other, you did not tell Inspector Fay the
truth.
He sat upright with a jerk, flamed with passion.
What the devil is it to do with you? he demanded fiercely.
I will tell you in a moment, she returned smoothly. When you
accounted for your time to the inspector, you told him that you went
into the house to refill your cigarette case?
His lethargy had disappeared. He leant forward, staring at her, his
hands clutching the arms of his chair.
But, unfortunately, you did not take the elementary precaution of
having a full case to support the story. In nine times out of ten you
would have got away with it. This was the tenth.
There was silence for a moment. She sat in an easy attitude, meeting his
gaze with complete confidence. No trace of his previous dullness
remained. He was alert and taut.
She went on, with delightful smoothness.
With an unpardonable lack of respect for the statement of a gentleman,
it occurred to the inspector to test the truth of that account. He did
not want to smoke but he asked you for a cigarette. It was a gentle
trap. There were only two in your case.
He ground out an oath under his breath.
Obviously you had not gone into the house to refill your case. Perhaps
you went in for some other reason. Perhaps you didn t go in at all.
Anyway, you lied and when people deliberately lie in such serious cases
as these, it may safely be imagined that they have some object to serve
in doing so. The inspector was concerned to discover what your object
was. So he came to me.
To you.... he muttered.
I told you, she returned, that he is a little too sharp to play
with clumsily. He suspected, from what had been told him, that we might
have had a stormy scene together, and had wished to keep it to
ourselves. He was quite ready to believe that the time you had failed so
lamentably to account for had really been passed with me in une petite
sc ne de jalousie . Fortunately, I had given him a true account of
myself, which was that I had been alone. So after the necessary
hesitation, and with just the right amount of annoyance, I was able to
confess that we had both lied, and that we had in fact been
together and he went away satisfied. I am a better liar than you.
She regarded him serenely. His expression was ugly. There was that in
the look of him that might have daunted any woman, but Phyllis
Astley Rolfe had lived chiefly by her wits for a sufficient time to be
quite impervious where another would have been silenced. She was as
completely without fear as she was without scruple. Her objects were
objects to be gained, by the most convenient and speedy means, and
quite irrespective of considerations which might have withheld another
from attempting to fulfill them. In furtherance of her present object,
she gave Copplestone look for look.
I return good for evil, she said. It is not a habit of mine. It is
really quite contrary to my usual practice. I told a lie to save you
from further suspicion. Considering the circumstances, you must admit
that it was exceedingly generous of me. And I expect you to be
grateful.
Anything but an expression of gratitude confronted her. He remained
silent, making a strong effort to mask his agitation. But his fingers
twitched spasmodically, and there was unmistakable fear in his eyes. She
watched him intently, losing no point of the effect she had created.
Well...? she said steadily.
There was no answer. She bent towards him.
I said you were with me. You were not with me. Where were you?
The man breathed heavily, his baleful gaze fixed on her. She met it
with unassailable composure.
Listen, she said slowly there are strange things in this house. I
know it. I ve known it for some time. Things that the light of day never
shines on. What are they?
He sprang up, and stood over her with clenched hands, his face torn with
fury.
Damn you! he cried hoarsely. What is my house, or what happens in it,
to you?
Sit down, she said firmly. You are not frightening me. To threaten a
woman is merely to increase her tenacity, and mine requires no
fortification. Please move away from me.
He obeyed, muttering. Her calmness disarmed him.
I am not sure, she continued, that I wanted you to answer my
question anyway at present. Perhaps your secrets might be too much,
even for my conscience and that is saying a great deal.
He had resumed his chair. There was a moment s pause.
You were foolish to mock me, she went on.
Mockery is the one thing a woman cannot accept, or forgive. She can
stand any amount of ill treatment and cruelty, in a sufficient cause.
But she cannot be mocked in any cause whatever. You made me certain
promises, which honor bound you to fulfil and then flung your
renunciation of them in my face, before strangers who understood. It was
a very mean and low down thing to do.
A faint, sneering smile passed over his face. Her voice hardened.
I am not a woman to defy and I am still less a woman to mock. You are
going to keep your promises.
I ll see you in hell first! he retorted brutally.
She laughed. You will not see me in hell first, she said calmly. You
may quite possibly see me in hell after because if there is a hell we
shall certainly meet there. But in the meantime you are going to redeem
your word.
He made a slow gesture round the black room.
You come to me now ... within a few hours....
Why not? she returned hardly.
Almost before her body is cold....
She shrugged her shoulders.
Christine Manderson was an incident, she said indifferently. A
disagreeable episode. She merely infatuated you, as she might have
infatuated any man. She has passed.
Passed, he muttered. Passed....
I do not profess to equal her in appearance, she admitted. But I am
not repulsive. I am considered to be extremely good looking, and I am
much more interesting to talk to than she was. Also, I am well bred.
Most people would find the balance in my favor. But, even if you do not,
the difference can only be very small. You will have to make the best of
it.
Or else? he snarled.
Or else, if you prefer it, I will exchange your promises for the
secrets of this house with no undertaking to keep them.
He sat biting his nails in the suppression of his rage. She languidly
corrected the folds of her dress, leant back in a charming attitude,
and waited with unassailable self possession. The silence was long.
How much do you want? he demanded, at last.
I am not asking you for money, she replied coldly.
I am offering it unasked, he retorted. How much do you want?
If you had offered to buy back your promises a week ago, she said, I
might have sold them to you. I do not know that I particularly looked
forward to their fulfilment. But you flaunted another woman in my face.
Put it all in the bill, he said coarsely.
Therefore I will give you nothing back. You shall have only your bond.
Why waste your breath on heroics to me? he sneered. You would sell
your soul for money. You have often boasted it.
I would sell my soul for money any day, she agreed frankly but not
my pride. I am too much of a sinner already to scruple over the disposal
of my soul. But it would not profit me to gain the whole world, and lose
my pride.
Bosh! he said contemptuously. Pride pays no bills and you owe too
many to let it deprive you of the pleasure of getting rid of a few.
That is as it may be, she returned. I have told you the only exchange
I will make.
He sprang up again. This time his anger was scornful.
Fool! he cried harshly. Take your warning! Do you think my
secrets if I have any are for you? Or that I, myself, am for you? Why
do you try to force yourself on to dangerous ground? There are things in
the world into which it is not good to pry.
Plenty, she said, unmoved.
I may have made you careless promises, he admitted. I have made many
women promises. It is a bad habit. I cannot keep them. I cannot, and
will not, marry you, or any other woman. The only one I might have
married ... is dead.
Again you throw her in my face, she murmured, through closed teeth.
I daresay I used you meanly, he acknowledged. I did use you meanly.
It was not the game to do what I did that night. I freely admit it. And
I offer you reparation the only reparation I can make. It would be the
wisest act of your life to take it.
You have heard my conditions, she replied. I shall not change them.
Unlike most women, I have been gifted with the faculty of being able to
make up my mind. The time for compromise has passed.
You don t care for me, he persisted. You couldn t care for any man.
You re not capable of it. It s not in you.
Whether or not I care for you does not enter into the matter at all,
she rejoined calmly. My capability for affection has no bearing on the
present question.
You were relying on marrying me to pay your debts, he declared. You
could not have built a more forlorn hope. I should not pay your debts if
I did marry you. I will give you five thousand pounds for your lie this
morning.
She was very angry. The insult dashed all the color from her face,
leaving it white and set in lines that made her look almost old. Her
eyes glittered menacingly.
You dare, she said slowly, to offer me five thousand pounds?
And consider yourself damned lucky! he retorted.
He took out his case, and lit a cigarette with a show of indifference.
I am not bound to offer you anything, he said carelessly. That small
point seems to have escaped you. You have no claim on me. I consider my
suggestion an exceedingly generous one. You can take it or leave it.
It s all you ll get.
She rose.
You insult me again, she said, in measured tones. You are not wise.
He laughed easily.
My dear Phyllis, he said, you are adorable in a rage but I am afraid
I must steel myself against your gentle exactions. Let me convince you
that I am really treating you in a highly preferential manner. During my
career three women have attempted to blackmail me. They were all
ugly so they got nothing. You are charming so you get five thousand
pounds. That is the most I have ever paid for my smaller indiscretions.
And I take the liberty of thinking it more than sufficient compensation
for the few erroneous impressions I may have allowed you to contract.
You are making the mistake, she said, in the same controlled tones,
of imagining that you are buying back your promises to me, which I can
quite understand that you value lightly. But I have told you that those
promises are not for sale. You have wandered from the real issue. You
are not buying the promises of your heart you are buying the secrets of
your house. Are they not on a different scale of values?
You know nothing of my house, he returned. You do not know whether
there are secrets in it or not.
I don t know, she confessed candidly. Possibly there are not. But I
am prepared to take a sporting chance that there are. And if I am
wrong so much the better for you.
He was silent, looking at her thoughtfully, as if carefully weighing his
course of action.
You were under the suspicion of Scotland Yard, she reminded him,
until I told my lie. You will be under it again if I admit my lie.
Inspector Fay would certainly not rest until he had thoroughly
investigated your reasons for giving a false account of yourself. He is
by no means a fool and I very much doubt that he is to be bought,
anyway so reasonably as I am.
Copplestone s face wore a strange expression. There was now no animosity
in it, but rather a mild resignation, in strange contrast to his
previous anger.
So, he said, after a pause, you would put them on to me again...?
I need not have taken them off you, she replied.
I have offered you five thousand pounds for that, he said slowly.
I have refused them.
Think over it well, he advised her impressively.
I do not need to, she returned.
For a moment they faced each other steadily.
You mean that finally? he asked.
Finally, she answered.
He moved to a door at the further end of the room, and opened it.
Come, he said quietly. You have gone too far to draw back. You shall
see the secrets of my house. Follow me.
CHAPTER XXIV
THE SECRET OF THE HOUSE
She followed him out of the black room into a dark, narrow passage.
Her calmness and self possession remained undisturbed. Without a tremor
she accepted this unexpected invitation to the secrets of the Crooked
House quite ignorant of, and indifferent to, the danger to which she
might be committing herself. That there were hidden things in the house
she had for a long time been convinced, but of their nature she had been
unable to form even a conjecture, in spite of many attempts to creep
into the mystery. Copplestone s sudden decision to reveal them to her
was a surprise, and an unpleasant check to the development of her
schemes. Either he placed a much lower value on his secrets than she had
expected, or her participation in them was by no means to be dreaded to
the extent that she had relied upon. In any case her position was
considerably weakened, and the success of her plans was no longer the
assured thing she had believed it to be.
In silence they ascended a flight of stairs, and reached a door which
appeared to be the entrance into a separate part of the building. It was
a massive oak door, fitted with double locks of remarkable strength for
a private house. Copplestone held it open, motioning her to pass before
him, and relocked it on the other side. She was still without any
nervousness, but her curiosity increased with every step. He led the way
on, and she followed him unhesitatingly. They traversed several
corridors, and turned many corners. Her sense of direction told her that
they had entered an extreme wing of the house, hidden away among the
thickest trees of the garden, and to all appearances unused. The place
was damp, dusty, and silent, with the intense silence of emptiness. Some
of the doors were open, showing unfurnished, neglected rooms. The papers
were peeling off the walls; the fittings were covered with the rust and
dirt of years; the soiled blinds half covered the closed, uncleaned
windows. The atmosphere was close and unhealthy.
What a parable of waste! she said.
He did not reply. They came to a square landing, and another heavy door
faced them. Copplestone stopped, and for a moment stood looking at her
intently. She did not flinch. He shrugged his shoulders, and took a key
from his pocket. It was a peculiar key, and was attached to a strong
chain. He fitted it into the lock, and opened the door. Then he turned
to her again, and she saw a change coming over his face.
Go in, he said curtly.
She hesitated, for the first time. He withdrew the key, and returned it
to his pocket.
You need not be afraid, he said.
I will follow you, she returned, watching him carefully.
He shrugged his shoulders again, and went into the room. She entered
after him.
It was a long, low room. There was a window at the far end, but it was
so dirty, and the curtains in front of it were so thick and discolored,
that the place was in semi darkness, and the air overwhelmingly heavy
and unwholesome. There was a little rough furniture, a strip of worn
carpet on the floor, and some untasted food on the table but it was not
any of those dismal objects that attached the woman s gaze. It was
rather a white, pasty face that seemed to gleam at her from the darkest
corner of the room the drawn pallid face, and dull lifeless eyes, of a
white haired man, who was sitting in a huddled, contorted attitude on a
bare wooden chair.
She shrank back with a startled exclamation, and turned to Copplestone.
His face was convulsed with fury, his eyes aflame with hatred.
Well? he said harshly.
She drew away from him fearfully.
What wickedness is this? she shuddered.
None of mine, he answered.
The vacant eyes rested on them with a fixed stare, completely devoid of
intelligence. The huddled figure evinced no sign of life. It appeared
to be unconscious of their presence. Copplestone advanced a few paces;
but the woman hung back, horrified.
Is that ... a living thing? she whispered.
He laughed an unnatural, metallic laugh.
Yes, he said it s living ... with as much life as its sins have left
it, and its rotten body can hold.
He turned back to her.
Come nearer, he said. There is nothing to be afraid of.
But the glassy stare of the motionless figure had unnerved her. She was
white, and shaking.
No, no, she muttered, shrinking further back.
He seized her arm.
I warned you, he cried roughly, but you wouldn t listen. You were
brave enough then when you thought I daren t stand up to you. You shall
learn your lesson you who talked so glibly of my secrets. Come closer.
He dragged her with him towards the corner.
Look! he commanded. Look at that thing in front of you that thing
crouching there like an ape. It was once a man. It was once an active,
intelligent, healthy human being a strong handsome member of a strong
handsome family. Everything was in its favor. There were no obstacles in
its path. It had many more natural gifts than the average man is endowed
with. It might have ruled an empire. It might have loaded its name with
honor, and left it to its children. It had the capability, the power,
and the opportunity to leave the world a better place than it found it.
Look at it now.
She stood silent, her head turned away. He went on, with increasing
rage.
Look at that man now! He has brought himself to a state of gibbering
insanity by a life of indulgence in every form of vice and depravity
known to humanity. He knowingly and deliberately drained his mental and
physical resources by every insult to nature that depraved men and
women the lowest creatures of the earth have devised for the
satisfaction of their diseased senses. He was a drunkard and drug fiend
before he was twenty. Every effort was made to check and reclaim him,
but he defied them all. He was fully warned. He knew what the
consequences would be. He knew that nature cannot be violated
continuously without exacting her penalty, sooner or later. But he
plunged on. Step by step he brought himself to this. His brain and his
body are decaying from the unnameable excesses he has committed with
both. He is literally rotting in front of us at this moment.
She put her hands up to her face.
Can he hear you? she gasped.
I don t know, he replied savagely. Perhaps he can. I hope he can. I
hope he can hear every word. It wouldn t be the first time he had heard
the story of his shame. And it won t be the last. Curse him!
She tried to draw him back.
Come away, she cried. How can you stand in front of the poor
creature, and talk like that before his face?
His iron grip closed on her wrist, and held her helpless.
Why not? he demanded, with dreadful bitterness. Why should he be
spared because he is suffering a fraction of the just and natural
consequences of his own deliberate acts? What is there to pity in that?
It is a merciful retribution. If you have any sympathy to show show it
to me.
To you? she echoed.
To me, he repeated.
She screamed, and tried to wrench herself from his grasp. The horrible
head had begun to move slowly from side to side. A faint, ghastly smile
appeared round the twisted lips.
Let me go, she cried. It s too dreadful.
He dragged her round again.
You forced yourself into my secrets, he said hardly. It is too late
to shrink back now. You shall know them to the full and then you may
go.
He paused, still holding her. In her horror, and under the sickly,
stifling atmosphere of the room, she was almost fainting. But he paid no
heed to her condition. His eyes were fixed malignantly on the grinning
object of his hatred.
That man, he said slowly, was free from any hereditary weakness. His
viciousness was not inherent. He came of a good, clean stock. When he
was thirty although the inevitable results of his violations had
already seized upon him he committed the crime of marrying. It was the
foulest sin of his life. He knew what the result would be what it was
bound by every natural law to be. He knew that the sins of the fathers
must be visited on the children he clenched his hands, and she winced
as her wrist was crushed in his grip and knowing that, he dared to
marry.
His voice rose. His face began to work with passion.
He married a good woman who bore all the cruelties he heaped upon her
because she loved him. Her money had been his only consideration and
when he had got all that he treated her like dirt. But there are limits
even to what a woman can bear. He broke her heart, and she died ...
mad. If only she had died a little sooner....
She steadied herself with an effort.
Who is he? she asked. Why is he here, in your house?
A flood of fury shook him.
His name is Oscar Winslowe, he said fiercely. He is my father.
She uttered a sharp cry, and wrenched her hand away from him.
Your father? That creature ... your father....
Yes, he cried wildly he is my father. I am George Copplestone
Winslowe. Do you wonder that I hate him? I am the victim of his
vices the heir to his sins. He has left me the legacy of outraged
nature. I am mad.
She recoiled from him, panting. He was beside himself. His face was
distorted; madness glared in his eyes. Then, suddenly, the paroxysm left
him. He turned to her weakly, with the appeal of his utter despair.
Pity me, he said. Oh, if you are capable of pitying anything in this
dreadful world, pity me! My awful inheritance is closing in on me.
Every day one more grain of reason leaves me. Like him, I might have
been a leader of men. Like him, I have power and capability. I have a
brain that could have raised me to the greatest heights. I have a body
that can bear any strain. But I am mad.
His agony was pitiful. He sobbed, wringing his hands.
I can feel the hideous thing growing in me, hour by hour a little
more a little more. I can feel its clutch tightening on me. And I can t
resist. I can t escape. The little mental balance I have is being
dragged away from me. In a few years if I let myself live to it I
shall be a babbling maniac. Nothing can save me. I knew it when I was a
boy before that thing there completely lost its reason. I knew I was
born a madman for my father s sins. It crept on me gradually one sign
after another one horrible secret impulse after another. The slow, sure
growth of madness. He buried his face in his hands. Oh, God! Oh,
God!
In the silence that followed the figure on the chair straightened itself
with a jerk, and gibbered at him, twitching spasmodically. The woman
turned away, shaking.
I live in hell, he moaned in all the torment of the uttermost hell.
I fly from one thing to another for respite, for relief but there is no
relief. I can only make madness of them all. Everything twists and turns
in my hands. I can keep nothing straight. Then another gust of passion
seized him. He shouted, beating his hands together. What right, he
cried furiously, have men and women to marry and bequeath disease and
madness to their children? What right have they to propagate the
rottenness of their minds and bodies? It s worse than murder. It s the
cruelest, the most wicked, of all crimes. What are the feelings of a
child to such parents? Is it not to hate them as I hate that foul thing
there? to curse them, as I curse him, with every breath? His arms
dropped limply to his sides. What is the use of hating? he said dully.
It can t cure me. It can t cure me.
He looked at her fixedly.
Well? he asked bitterly. You know the secrets of my house. Are you
satisfied?
She laid a hand on his arm, and turned him gently towards the door.
There were tears in her eyes.
Come away, she said weakly. Let us speak somewhere else.
He followed her. They went out, without another look at the figure
behind them, and returned in silence to the black room.
CHAPTER XXV
TRUER COLORS
A great change had come over her. All the hardness had disappeared from
her face. It was transformed by a wonderful new pity a latent
compassion, stirred for the first time by this miserable man s utter
tragedy. And so transformed she was very lovely with a loveliness that
all the arts of an accomplished society woman had never bestowed upon
her.
Forgive me, she said gently. I would not have said what I did if I
had even thought ... of that.
He looked down at her, a world of agony in his tortured eyes.
Well, he asked do you still want to marry me ... now?
For an instant the old hardness flashed back.
You would have married her , she returned.
I wonder, he said slowly. I wonder ... if I should.
His gaze wandered vacantly round the room.
She intoxicated me, he said. Her memory intoxicates me still. She set
fire to all my passions. She made me forget the barrier. But I think I
really hated her. Perhaps ... if she hadn t died in the garden ... I
might have killed her....
The madness was leaving him, and the weakness of reaction taking its
place. He put a hand on her shoulder, and leant heavily on her. His face
was mild and kind the face of the normal man.
Phyllis, he said softly, I mocked you, and treated you badly. But it
wasn t really I. Forgive a poor madman the sins of his madness.
She made no attempt to check her tears. He took her hand, as gently as a
child.
Don t cry, he begged. See I am all right now. Sit down, and let us
talk.
Still leaning on her, he moved to a couch, and drew her down beside him.
First, he said, I will tell you why I lied to Inspector Fay. I did
not go into the house to fill my cigarette case. I was mad. It came on
me as it often does when I see sane people about me a rush of hatred
and despair.
He spoke dispassionately, without a trace of the terrible disorder that
had possessed him a few minutes before. Only the gloom remained the
shadow that never left him.
You can understand, he went on, what my life has been since this
cloud first settled on me. I tried to fight against it but how could I
fight against a thing that I knew to be there, creeping on me day after
day when I knew that in the end I must give way? Every hour seemed to
bring some fresh proof of the madness that was in me some proof that
made resistance more and more futile and hopeless. A thousand times I
have been tempted to kill myself but always there was the dim,
desperate hope that some miraculous twist of sanity might yet deliver
me. I can t convey to you a tenth a hundredth part of the agony of
that struggle. There were times when I shrank into the farthest corner
of my darkest cellar, and prayed, as only a madman could pray, to be
spared from the unjust curse. There were times when I stood out on the
roof of my house, and defied the God I had prayed to....
He stared straight out in front of him, a figure of unutterable
pathos a helpless accuser of Eternal Laws.
If I were suffering for a fault of my own, I would bear my punishment
uncomplaining. But I am innocent. I have done nothing to deserve this
torture. And there is always the thought of what I might have been of
what I know I could have been. That is the cruelest torment of all. I
have to see sane men and women wasting every minute of their
lives without the slightest appreciation of the value, or the
responsibilities, of reason who might as well be mad, for all the use
they are to their fellow creatures. And I.... He broke off. That is
enough about myself, he said. I want to talk about you.
He looked at her in surprise, as if noticing the alteration in her for
the first time.
How changed you are, he said. You have never looked like that before.
You have always been so hard. Why have you never looked like that
before?
She was silent. She bent her head, as if ashamed of betraying herself.
Was all that hardness ... only a cloak ... to hide yourself?
He seized her hand tightly.
You fool! You fool! he cried to make yourself hard and unfeeling and
unnatural to try to stamp all the heart out of your life to blaspheme
your sex. Don t you know that a hard woman is the most terrible thing in
the world? Don t you know that while men dare to think that they have
the image of God, it is women who can really have the heart of God? And
to think that all the time you have disguised yourself, you have been
capable of looking like that.
I have been up against the world, she said. I have never had enough
money to be soft hearted. No woman with feeling can get five hundred
per cent. out of her income.
What does it matter, he returned, if she can get five hundred per
cent. out of life?
He still held her hand, his eyes fixed longingly on her face.
If only I were not mad, he said, with all his sadness now I know
that you are really a woman....
Let me go, she said brokenly, withdrawing her hand from his.
Not yet, he returned, detaining her. There is something more I want
to do. He paused. My dear, he said softly, an hour ago I would not
have married you even if I had been sane. Now I want to marry you
although I am mad. But, since that cannot be, there is something else.
He released her, and stood up. I want you always to look like that, he
said. I want you to forget that you have ever tried to disguise
yourself. I want to make it possible for you to go through the rest of
your life with your heart in its proper place.
He took his check book from his pocket.
No, no, she said quickly not that.
Please, he insisted.
I would have taken it before, she said, forcing back her tears. But
not now.
You must, he declared. My money is no use to me. I can t do anything
worth doing with it. With all my fantastic extravagancies, I only spend
a small part of my income. The rest has been accumulating for years. I
shall never use it, and when I die it will pass to some one I have never
seen. It is doing no good and I want it to do some good. What better
thing could I do with it than give it ... to the woman I would marry if
I could?
She sprang up.
For God s sake, she cried, don t say that! I can t bear it!
He laid a hand again on her shoulder.
Do you care? he asked slowly. I don t think you cared before. I
thought you were only sorry for me now. Do you really care?
I do care! she cried recklessly. I care and care and care. My God,
how I care!
He turned his face upwards, and over it passed a dreadful, mocking
smile.
O God of Mercy! he muttered another torment!
He drew away from her.
I shall do this for you, he said firmly. I intend to do this. And
then we must not see each other again. I hope that when you marry, as
you must, you will marry a good, clean man a man who can stand out
among his fellow creatures, and need not shrink away from them, as I
must. I want you to be very happy and bring happy children to the
world.... His voice shook. And forget there are unfortunate people in
it ... who may only gaze hungrily over the gulf that they can never
cross.
He left her sobbing, and went to his writing table.
No one will know, he said. I will draw it to myself. The bank is
quite close here. I will walk there and cash it at once.
He wrote the check, and rose.
Wait for me here, he said. I shall only be a few minutes. And he
went out with the face of a stricken man.
CHAPTER XXVI
PROVIDING FOR THE WORST
Though Inspector Fay had disclosed no more than was necessary for the
purpose of the initial charge, the arrest of James Layton was popularly
considered to have solved the mystery of the murder of Christine
Manderson.
No one realized more fully than Layton himself the overwhelming strength
of the case against him. He was as good as condemned already. Beyond his
own assertion of innocence, he was utterly defenseless against a
sequence of evidence that might well have shattered the strongest reply.
And he was without any reply at all, except his own denial. He could
only admit the truth of the damning train of circumstances, in face of
which his mere word was hopelessly and, he was compelled to
acknowledge, justly inadequate. The secret of his identity most
crushing fact of all was lost. He was the Michael Cranbourne whom
Christine Manderson, then Thea Colville, had drawn on to ruin and
disgrace. He had threatened her, in the presence of witness, with just
such an end as she had met with. He had been seen lurking in the garden
at the time of the crime. He had been beside himself. And to all that he
had no more convincing answer than the plea of not guilty. He placed
himself, quite dispassionately, in the position of his own judge and
jury. There could be only one result.
The strange message of hope, brought to him by Jenny West, from a
mysterious foreigner who had declared knowledge of his innocence and of
half the truth, aroused his curiosity, if no more. That one person, at
all events, had discovered, and was apparently pursuing, an alternative
to his own guilt was interesting, if a slender encouragement to build
on. He was not disposed to cling to flimsy hopes. He accepted his
position with perfect calmness. Since the confession of his identity to
Inspector Fay a load seemed to have been lifted from his mind, and with
it had passed the revival of mad passion which the sight of Christine
Manderson s fatal beauty had aroused. He found himself able to dwell on
her memory even to contemplate her death with a cold detachment which
surprised himself. He no longer shrank from conjuring up her image but
now it was a dead image from a dead world. And not without surprise
also, and perhaps a certain satisfaction he found himself looking
forward to a visit from Jenny West.
She came to him at the appointed time. She was very white. The deep
shadows of sleepless grief and anxiety were round her eyes but in them
shone the fire of a dogged, dauntless courage. Her great untamed soul
was aflame with revolt against the implacable circumstances that had
placed the man whose name a thousand had blessed on the highroad to the
gallows. She threw herself against the wall of facts with all the force
of her primitive love. She was one of those whose trust rises to its
greatest heights when opposed to reason.
He greeted her kindly. He was cheerful and composed. He showed that he
was glad to see her.
We shall save you, Jim! she declared, straining back the tears that
sprang to her eyes at his kindness. I know we shall! I know it!
God will save His workman, he returned quietly if it is His will.
He looked at her closely. And something very like affection came into
his face.
You are pale, he said. You are over strained. You haven t slept.
She bent her head, to hide her brimming eyes.
My child.... he said gently.
What does it matter, she sobbed, if I haven t slept? How can I
sleep when you are ... here?
Listen, my dear, he said we must face this thing squarely. It s no
use trying to shut our eyes to the truth, however unpleasant it may be.
As the case stands at present, no jury in the world could acquit me. I
have no reply to the charge, except to declare that I did not kill
Christine Manderson and that will not help me. The evidence is more
than enough to satisfy any impartial, clear thinking man or woman. It
would satisfy me. That I know myself to be innocent will not assist me
to establish my innocence. Thousands of things may happen in the
meantime but I must prepare to suffer the penalty for a crime that I
did not commit.
You shall not! she cried passionately. If there is justice in heaven
or earth, you shall not!
I do not cling to life, he returned. It has very little to give me,
or to take away. Men may find me guilty but I shall stand before God
innocent. It will not be the first time I have stood before God.
A spark of his old fanaticism flashed into his eyes for a moment, then
faded.
I shall be ready, he said steadily, for whatever He sends.
Men shall not find you guilty, she declared. There are three people
working for you. The truth will be discovered.
Your mysterious Frenchman? he smiled. What has he done?
I don t know, she confessed. He tells me nothing except to keep on
promising that you will be saved. And that is enough for me.
A frown darkened Layton s face.
I wish you would not put yourself so completely into the hands of a
stranger, he said doubtfully. Who and what, is this man? And how does
he come to be mixed up in this affair?
I know nothing whatever about him, she replied. But there is
something that makes me trust him. I believe he will keep his promise.
I don t like it, he insisted.
If I didn t help him, she said, I could do nothing. And I should go
mad.
What has he given you to do? he asked.
I promised not to tell any one, she hesitated.
He shrugged his shoulders.
You had better tell me. You have no one else to protect you.
It is something I can t understand, she said slowly. This morning I
had to write out the names and addresses of all the Art and Picture
Dealers from the Directory , and this afternoon I am to go round in a
car to as many of them as I can, with a letter from the French Embassy,
to ask if any articles have ever been supplied to, or orders taken from,
a Miss Masters, of 35, De Vere Terrace, Streatham, and if so, what.
Layton stared at her in astonishment.
What possible connection can that have with the case? he exclaimed.
I don t know, she said again. I ve tried to think.
The French Embassy, he mused. That is strange....
He checked himself, and looked at his watch.
You time is nearly up, he said. Listen to me carefully. There is one
very important thing that I want you to understand. Whatever may develop
in the meantime, I intend to prepare for the worst.
He kept her silent with a firm gesture.
My work must go on. No matter what happens to me, my work must go on.
And it must be carried on as I have begun it, by some one who has worked
with me, and understands my objects by some one who is human, and
unlimited by sect or creed. I don t want to make people religious it
would spoil most of them. I want to make them healthy and happy. I would
rather they were clean pagans than unclean Christians. No soul is saved
or lost because it happens to take a certain view of the Mysteries of
God. It is the bodies I care for the bodies I want to build. Humanity
should be a song of thanksgiving, not a prayer for alleviation.
The fires kindled again. His face was lit up.
You must continue my work. If I should have to leave it ... you will
find everything yours. There is over a million. Use it as I have taught
you. Use it to help children to grow into men and women, and men and
women to grow into old men and women. Use it to help human beings
against the cruelties they inflict on each other and animals against
the cruelties inflicted on them. Promise me that if the worst happens,
you will go on where I leave off.
Tears blinded her. She could not speak.
Promise, he insisted.
I will, she sobbed. I will go on as long as I can live after you.
He stood still, looking at her fixedly. There was the dawn of an
awakening on his face.
My God! he whispered, I was wrong. I do cling to life. I want to
live. O God, save me!
And the girl uttered a great sigh of thankfulness, and fell fainting
against the wire partition that stood between them.
CHAPTER XXVII
THE DISAPPEARANCE OF TRANTER
At one o clock on the following day, Monsieur Dupont sat in his room
waiting for Tranter. At half past one he had become impatient. At two he
seized the telephone directory, and, a minute later, the instrument. At
two thirty he obtained his number.
The answer to his first question stiffened him into an attitude of rigid
tensity.
Mr. Tranter is not in, sir, a voice told him. He has disappeared.
Disappeared? Monsieur Dupont echoed sharply.
We do not know what has happened to him. He went out last night at nine
o clock, and has not returned.
Not returned.... the listener muttered.
We are getting anxious, the voice went on. He left orders for his
supper, and there is no doubt that he intended to return. We have
telephoned to the hospitals and the police stations, but nothing has
been heard of him. Do you happen to know where he was going?
There was a moment s pause. Monsieur Dupont s hands were clenched so
tightly round the instrument that the veins stood out on them like
cords.
Yes, he said slowly, I know where he was going.
He rose quickly.
I will find him, he promised and rang off.
He replaced the instrument, and stood still. For the first time since
his arrival in London fear found a place in the expression of his face.
Dieu , he whispered that Crooked House....
He seized his hat and stick, and hurried out to his car.

Remarkable changes were in progress when he arrived at the Crooked
House. A small army of workmen swarmed over the whole place in a
condition of feverish energy. There were stacks of tools, dozens of
machines, and cartloads of material. At first sight it might have
appeared as if nothing less than the effects of an earthquake could have
been in process of repair but, as Monsieur Dupont stood staring about
him in amazement, it became apparent that the men were engaged in
eliminating the crookedness of the garden, and must have been so engaged
from a very early hour. Many of the twisting paths had been shorn of
their high maze like walls of hedge, and the paths themselves were in
varying stages of conversion or disappearance. Under rapid and ruthless
hands straightness was already appearing out of the confusion. Monsieur
Dupont looked positively frightened.
Mon Dieu , he exclaimed aloud, they are making it a human garden!
The house itself presented a no less startling aspect. It was no longer
gloomy, deserted, and silent. It was teeming with life. Every window was
open, and from within came sounds of rapacious cleaning. A hundred
painters had commenced a vigorous assault upon the exterior, and
representatives of every branch of house decoration were attacking the
interior. It was a scene of resurrection.
Monsieur Dupont almost ran to the open front door. Copplestone s
manservant was at work in the hall, and came forward with a sphinx like
expression.
Mr. Copplestone? said Monsieur Dupont.
Mr. Copplestone is away, sir.
Away...?
He left in the car early this morning, sir, without saying where he was
going or when he would be back.
Monsieur Dupont was plainly staggered.
Was he alone?
I do not know, sir.
You do not know?
I did not see him leave, sir. He gave me my instructions in the
library, and ordered me to remain there until he had gone.
Monsieur Dupont took a threatening step towards him.
Where is Mr. Tranter? he demanded, with sudden fierceness.
The man met his challenging gaze steadily.
Mr. Tranter, sir?
Mr. Tranter came here last night between ten and eleven o clock.
I think you must be mistaken, sir. If he had come here, I should have
seen him.
Monsieur Dupont clenched his fists.
I am not mistaken! I say that he came here last night!
I did not see him, sir.
Since then he has disappeared. He has not returned to his house, and
nothing has been heard of him. Where is he?
I know nothing of Mr. Tranter, sir.
That is not true! Monsieur Dupont almost shouted.
Sir!
I say that is not true!
The man drew himself up.
It certainly is true, sir.
It is not! Will you tell the truth to me or to the police?
I have nothing to tell, the man insisted doggedly.
Monsieur Dupont appeared to be beside himself.
Dieu! he cried, if any harm has come to Mr. Tranter, you shall pay
for it all of you!
The man shrugged his shoulders.
I can only repeat, sir, that I have not seen Mr. Tranter, and that, so
far as I know, he has not been to this house. He is certainly not here
now. You are welcome to search every room for him if you like. Mr.
Copplestone left word that the house was to be open to any one who might
wish to go over it.
He said that? Monsieur Dupont exclaimed, his anger giving place to
astonishment.
Yes, sir.
Monsieur Dupont turned away without another word, and walked slowly to
the gates. Reaching them, he stopped, and looked back.
In the name of heaven, he muttered, what happened in that house last
night?
He went back to his car. Amazement and anxiety were blended on his face.
It was plain that his calculations had received an unexpected check, the
meaning of which he could not at present grasp. The sudden
transformation of the house and garden was a development that had not
entered into his scheme of procedure. It presented him with an entirely
new and unlooked for problem. After a moment s indecision, he took out
his pocket book, referred to an address, and gave it to his chauffeur.
During the return journey he sat with his face between his hands, buried
in thought. When the car stopped before a house in Grosvenor Gardens, he
lifted his head slowly and heavily, as if rousing himself from a stupor.
Mrs. Astley Rolfe, if you please, he said to the footman who answered
his summons.
Mrs. Astley Rolfe is not at home, sir.
It is most important, said Monsieur Dupont. I wished to speak to her
of a matter connected with Mr. George Copplestone.
She went away early this morning, sir.
Away? Monsieur Dupont repeated.
With Mr. Copplestone.
Monsieur Dupont started back.
With Mr. Copplestone?
Yes, sir. Just before eight o clock.
With Mr. Copplestone....
He came in his car, sir, and insisted on Mrs. Astley Rolfe getting up
to see him. She went away with him ten minutes afterwards, without
telling us where she was going or when to expect her back.
Monsieur Dupont s face had become blanker and blanker. He stared at the
man speechlessly then turned from the door, and gazed in a helpless
fashion up and down the street.
Mille diables! he murmured, what does it mean....
He got into his car again. He looked about him like a man dazed by a
heavy blow. Returning to the Savoy, he went up to his room.
There was a telegram on the table. He opened it, and read:
The name was George Copplestone Winslowe,
LESSING.
Monsieur Dupont uttered an extraordinary sound. In a flash the gloom and
uncertainty that had held him gave place to a seething excitement.
Crushing the telegram into his pocket, he rushed from the room. Two
minutes later he was on his way to Scotland Yard.
CHAPTER XXVIII
IN PURSUIT
Inspector Fay was occupied with the arrangement of the evidence to be
presented at the inquest on the body of Christine Manderson. He disliked
interruptions when at work, but the appearance of Monsieur Dupont
banished his annoyance, and called forth a smile of complacent triumph.
My friend, said Monsieur Dupont, you know me well enough to be sure
that I would not mislead you?
There was that in the look of him that caused the smile to fade from the
inspector s face.
Of course, he replied, laying down his papers.
There is not a moment to lose. You must come with me.
Come with you?
Now immediately.
But where?
Wherever it may be necessary to go. I do not yet know myself. I only
know that we must go.
Impossible, the inspector declared. I must be ready for the inquest.
If you do not come with me, Monsieur Dupont retorted, you will not be
ready for the inquest. He allowed his excitement to overflow. Why do
you stand there? he cried. I tell you, there is not a moment to lose.
Cannot you see that I am serious? In all the years that you have known
me I have never been more serious. Come!
What for? demanded the inspector sharply.
To discover the truth of the death of Christine Manderson.
The truth is discovered, returned the inspector, looking down at his
papers.
The truth is not discovered, said Monsieur Dupont.
It is a perfectly clear case, the inspector retorted. There cannot be
the smallest doubt that Layton killed her.
Layton did not kill her. At the beginning I warned you to ignore the
obvious. But you did not. Layton is no more guilty of the crime than you
are.
I am satisfied, the inspector said shortly.
You must please yourself, said Monsieur Dupont. I cannot wait. There
are two lives to save his and another. I came here to keep my word to
you. I promised that if I succeeded in solving the mystery, I would hand
the rest to you. I do not want credit from this affair. There is another
meaning in it for me. I am ready to hand the rest to you, if you will
come and take it. If you will not come I must go on to the end myself.
The choice is to you.
Inspector Fay looked at him steadily for a moment. Then he turned back
to his desk, and locked up his papers.
I will come, he said.
CHAPTER XXIX
ETHICS OF KILLING
They swung out from Scotland Yard into Whitehall.
What has happened? the inspector asked.
Monsieur Dupont leant forward, controlling his excitement with an
effort.
Mon Dieu , he said, I wish I knew!
He took the telegram from his pocket.
It is an hour only that I have returned from Richmond. I found the
house of George Copplestone in course of transformation. I found all the
windows open. I found men and women cleaning painting making new. I
found a hundred men ... making the crooked garden straight.
Well? said the inspector why not?
Monsieur Dupont brought his hands together impatiently.
Why not? There are a thousand reasons why not. But the reason why....
Is it an extraordinary thing for a man to open his windows, paint his
house, and straighten his garden?
It is! exclaimed Monsieur Dupont. It is more than an extraordinary
thing it is a gigantic, a brain splitting thing if he has kept his
windows closed, his house unpainted, and his garden crooked for twenty
years. The house of a man is the reflection of his soul. It was the
reflection of George Copplestone s soul yesterday. But ... something
happened in it last night. And to day....
He broke off, and began to smooth out the telegram on his knee.
The moment I entered that house, he continued, I knew it was a wicked
house. And when that dreadful thing happened, I felt positively that the
wickedness of the house had some direct connection with the crime in the
garden. I felt that it would be impossible to solve one without solving
the other. I knew, also, that you would certainly be satisfied with the
evidence against James Layton, and would consider no other possibility.
That evidence, I admit, was unanswerable but I, with some previous
knowledge to help me, knew that Layton was innocent. The difficulty in
front of me was to prove the guilt of the real criminal in time. My
friend Tranter, and that remarkable young prot g e of Layton, Jenny
West, agreed to help me. Together we began to draw the nets, and the
criminal was aware of our movements. In the country yesterday I
discovered the identity of the most important witness in the case but
when I went to find her in the evening, she had been snatched away. I
instructed Tranter to discover and bring to me the secret of the Crooked
House, whatever it might be. He set out to do so at nine o clock last
night. And he has disappeared.
Disappeared? the inspector exclaimed.
Without a trace. I, only, knew where he was going. And not only has he
disappeared but Copplestone and Mrs. Astley Rolfe have disappeared with
him.
Inspector Fay began to show more interest.
They will be wanted for the inquest, he said sharply.
If we do not find them in time for the inquest, Monsieur Dupont
returned, there will be two inquests to hold.
Two inquests? the inspector echoed.
I could not understand it, continued Monsieur Dupont. It was contrary
to all my calculations. I was bewildered and you may recollect that I
am not often bewildered. But when I returned to my hotel, I found this.
He held out the telegram. It is the answer to a certain inquiry I have
made.
What does it mean? the inspector asked, handing it back.
It means, said Monsieur Dupont slowly, that we shall be lucky if we
find Tranter alive.
Where can they have gone?
I do not know. I can only guess and if I have not guessed rightly, we
shall not see him again.
Are you telling me, the inspector demanded, that Copplestone killed
the woman he had just become engaged to?
I shall tell you who killed her within twelve hours, Monsieur Dupont
replied. I will tell you why she was killed now.
He paused.
Why, he asked, did the murderer, whoever it was, kill her so
horribly? Why was it not enough to deprive her of life? Could one have
desired more? Why was she stamped on, and torn, and crushed?
It was obviously done in the madness of jealousy and revenge, replied
the inspector.
It was done in madness, said Monsieur Dupont but it was not the
madness of jealousy or revenge. It was the madness of a strange and
terrible hatred. It was done because the killer hated her beauty and
not her.
The inspector stared at him blankly.
Hated her beauty, and not her...?
Twenty years ago, said Monsieur Dupont, there was in France a very
beautiful woman. She was named Colette d Orsel. It was said that she was
the most beautiful woman in the country. She was also very rich, very
generous, and very kind. She was always doing good actions. She had not
an enemy in the world. There was no one who could have wished her a
moment s pain. She was only twenty five. With several of her friends she
went to stay at Nice. One night she was found in the gardens of her
hotel almost torn to pieces.
I remember the case, said the inspector. It was a ghastly affair.
There appeared no motive. She was wearing some splendid jewels. They
had been crushed with her, but nothing was missing not a stone. She had
just returned from the tables, and had not troubled to deposit her
winnings of the evening with the cashier of the hotel. Forty thousand
francs were found on the body. Not a note had been touched. The greatest
detectives of France were called in to solve the mystery but they
solved nothing. They made the mistake of trying to find a motive. They
looked for a person who could have had a reason to kill her. But it was
time lost. They should have looked among the people who had no reason to
kill her. The weeks became months, and still they discovered nothing.
That crime is a mystery to day.
The inspector s attention was rivetted. He remained silent.
Ten years ago, Monsieur Dupont proceeded, there was in Boston a young
girl named Margaret McCall. She was wonderfully beautiful. Her parents
were poor people, and she worked for her living. She was quiet and
reserved by nature. She made few friends, and cared little for the
society of men. Naturally there were hundreds who regretted, and
attempted to overcome, that characteristic; but she went her own way
quietly and firmly. One evening her body was found in a lonely part of
one of the public parks torn and crushed in the most terrible manner.
The police were helpless. The thing that baffled them completely was the
absence of any motive for the crime. They tried to find one but all
that they found was what I have said, that she had been a good, honest
girl that she had had no enemies that she had not jilted a man, or
wronged a woman that she had never flirted, or encouraged men to pay
attentions to her. Yet there she had been found broken and mutilated.
The small sum of money she carried had remained untouched. The crime
was never solved.
His voice had sunk lower. He had dwelt on each detail with impassive
deliberation.
This week, Christine Manderson without doubt the most beautiful woman
of the three was found in that crooked garden at Richmond, if possible
in a more horrible condition than either of the others.
You mean, exploded the inspector, that the murderer of Colette
d Orsel at Nice twenty years ago also killed Margaret McCall in Boston
ten years after?
I do, replied the low voice.
And Christine Manderson here three days ago?
And Christine Manderson here three days ago. But this time there was a
difference. An unfortunate chain of circumstances provided clear
evidence against an innocent man James Layton. I admit that as the case
stood you had no option but to arrest him. But in doing so you committed
the same mistake that your French and American brothers had committed
before you. They had looked for a motive, and could not find one. You
found a motive, and devoted yourself to the man with the motive. You
should have looked for the Destroyer.
There was something of awe in the silence that followed, like the hush
that succeeds the passing of a storm.
My friend, said the inspector slowly, what utterly monstrous thing
are you telling me?
Monsieur Dupont turned to him a face of massive innocence.
Is it monstrous? he said mildly. If a man is born with a longing to
kill elephants, he is a daring sportsman. If the longing is to kill
beetles, he is a scientist. But if the inclination is to kill men or
women he is a criminal lunatic. Why? If the desire to kill is not in
itself monstrous, the desire to kill a particular thing, whatever it may
be, cannot be monstrous. It can only be illegal. If it is dreadful to
kill a young child, it must be dreadful to kill anything young. If it is
cowardly for a man to kill a woman, it is cowardly for a man to kill the
female sex in any shape or form. Yet, what scientist allows the matter
of sex to interfere with the impalement of his beetle? Nor would he do
so if his hobby were to impale human beings. If he searches for a
beautiful beetle to kill, it only requires a broadening of his
particular outlook for him to search for a beautiful woman to kill.
There may be a perfectly sane and moral country in the world although I
have never heard of it in which it would be criminal to kill the
beetle, and scientific to kill the woman. I confess that a well mounted
collection of beautiful women would be very much more interesting to me
than the finest collection of beautiful beetles. But if I have the one,
I am made a member of a Royal Society and if I have the other, I am
executed. And the only reason for that is that the human beings make the
laws, and not the beetles.
The car swung round a sharp corner, and the inspector s amazement was
interrupted by the sudden necessity of keeping his position. Monsieur
Dupont continued slowly.
But the monstrousness of this case is not that three people have been
killed but that three people have been more than killed. It is
monstrous because we have none of the simple dignity of the primitive
slayer, and all the morbid excesses of the modern despoiler. While it
might be an entirely respectable thing to kill a woman to preserve her
beauty, it is an entirely monstrous thing to kill her to destroy it.
That is the only reason why the collector of beetles and butterflies is
not the most cold blooded of murderers. That is the only
What in the name of all that s unholy, gasped the inspector, are you
going to say next?
Monsieur Dupont leant forward as the car stopped, and opened the door.
Next, he replied gravely, I am going to inform you that we have
arrived at Paddington, and request you to get out.
CHAPTER XXX
MONSIEUR DUPONT S TASK
He bought the tickets, and conducted the inspector to a train.
Where are we going? demanded the bewildered officer, as Monsieur
Dupont settled himself in a corner, and produced his cigar case.
We are going, said Monsieur Dupont, to a delightful little village,
hidden away in the hills of the country far from the sins of
cities where they do not even know that Paris is the center of the
world.
Fortunately they had the carriage to themselves. Monsieur Dupont smoked
in silence for some minutes.
I will explain to you, he began, at last, how I came to be concerned
in this affair. The reason was that, after my retirement, I had the
honor to marry a cousin of Colette d Orsel. The brother of my wife had
been one of the party at Nice at the time of the crime, and, though
there was not the least evidence against him, the police had allowed it
to be known that they looked upon him as the guilty person. You know how
ready certain people are to discuss and even to credit the wildest
theories and you know also that after sufficient discussion the wildest
theories become not only possibilities, but probabilities. The cloud of
suspicion hung over him, ruining his health and his life, and casting a
shadow over the whole family. When I married my wife, I determined that
the shadow should be removed. And for the past two years I have devoted
myself to that object.
You can imagine, he went on, after a pause, the difficulties that
confronted me. Eighteen years had elapsed since the crime had been
committed. Men, women, and even buildings, had passed, and been
replaced records had been lost memories failed. But money,
perseverance, and imagination slowly conquered. Step by step the years
were overcome. With the aid of a small army of assistants, I succeeded
in isolating a certain person. I placed that person beside the dead body
of Colette d Orsel, and began my pursuit. Mon Dieu , how I worked!
After the hardest year of my life, I at last established a link between
the death of Colette d Orsel and the death of Margaret McCall and that
link was the personality I had isolated in the first place at Nice. But
it had changed itself. I followed scent after scent trail after trail.
When I came to London a few days ago, I had sufficient information to
allow me to commence the final stage of the adventure. I had solved the
most difficult question of all the present identity of my quarry. The
second most difficult question remained to be solved proofs of guilt.
How could I obtain them? How could I prove that this person living here
in all the security of time was the person who had torn those two women
to pieces in America and France ten and twenty years ago? I had certain
clues to follow up, but the results could not possibly have been
sufficient to prove such an accusation. What was I to do? To rely upon
observation? To search for and wait for a proof in this person s
daily intercourse with the world? To place a beautiful woman within
reach, and watch for a betrayal? That was actually the object in my mind
when I called on my friend Tranter, and requested him to open to me the
doors of London society. Sooner or later, I should have found, or
brought about, the situation I was looking for. It might have been
years doubtless it would have been years if he had not, by the most
remarkable chance, taken me direct to that house at Richmond. Then came
the death of Christine Manderson. It was horrible appalling! And to
think that I, who had detected and tracked the Destroyer, had been there
in the same garden, within a few yards of the third death, and yet was
no nearer my proofs! And to add to my difficulties, there was the
certainty that an innocent man would suffer unjustly if I could not
succeed in time.
He paused, looking grimly out at the passing scenery.
And if I had not sent Tranter to the Crooked House yesterday, I do not
know how I could have succeeded in time.
He turned abruptly from the window, put his feet up on the seat, and
closed his eyes.
I am a little tired, he said. If you will excuse me, I will take a
nap.
He slept for an hour.

They got out at a small country station. The shadows of the hot twilight
were merging into darkness. A few minutes walking brought them to an
inn, at which Monsieur Dupont demanded, and obtained, a conveyance.
For half an hour they drove through the heavily scented air of the
country. Scarcely a word was spoken until they reached another village.
There, Monsieur Dupont requested the inspector to alight and they
proceeded on foot.
The red rear light of a motor car appeared at the turn of a corner.
Monsieur Dupont drew a deep breath.
Le bon Dieu be thanked! he muttered.
The car was stationary and empty. Monsieur Dupont laid a hand on the
radiator.
It is hot, he said. They have only been here a few minutes. Do not
make a sound.
He opened a gate. The long low shape of a house was in front of them.
They stood still, listening. There was no sound, no light.
To the back, Monsieur Dupont whispered.
CHAPTER XXXI
WHAT THEY HEARD
They crept round the house. At the back a pair of French windows were
open, but heavy curtains were drawn across them. No light was visible.
They listened. A voice was speaking slowly, scarcely above a whisper,
but a whisper of contemptuous pride.
Yes, it said, I am the Destroyer! I was born to kill. It was the
curse of my birth.
The silence of the room was broken only by the faint sound of a woman
sobbing. Monsieur Dupont and the inspector drew nearer to the window.
You fools! said the arrogant voice. What are your laws of Right and
Wrong to me? I am Right and Wrong. What are your Codes of Sin? I am
Sin. Who are you to judge me? Who are you to set your little laws
against My Madness?
There was a long pause. Then the voice continued, in a tone of dull
bitterness.
Ever since I had strength to break, I have broken to tear, I have
torn. The disease took command of me long before I knew its meaning.
When I was a child the sight of pretty things frightened me. I used to
shrink from them, and hide my face. I was only quiet and normal when
there were plain, colorless things about me. As I grew older the fear
developed into hatred and with hatred grew, slowly and subtly, the
inclination to destroy. At first the opposition of all that was normal
in me sufficed to keep the desire in check, but day by day it grew
stronger and stronger, and day by day the power to resist became less
and less. The increase of the hatred into madness followed the growth of
the impulse towards the first surrender. It came upon me for the first
time when I was twelve. How well I remember that day! My sanity had
fought its strongest battle, and my head was still throbbing and
swimming with the strain of it. I was taken to a strange house, and left
alone in a bright room. On the wall there was a picture of a very
beautiful woman. I couldn t take my eyes off it. I couldn t move from in
front of it. New passions, that I had never felt before, were tearing
me. The picture seemed to be alive, to be mocking me. I hated it. I felt
that it was cruel and loathsome that it had wronged me. My whole body
was on fire my brain was flaming. Then something seemed to snap in my
head. I lost myself. Irresistible forces took possession of me, and used
me. When I came to myself ... the picture was lying at my feet ... in
fragments.
The voice settled down into an expressionless monotone, pursuing its
story without emotion.
From that moment my doom lay on me. I had made the initial submission.
Any attempt at resistance after that was futile. I was helpless. Out of
my hatred of beauty in any shape or form came the desire to obtain the
most beautiful things I could find to enjoy the mad ecstasy of
shattering them. I had all the morbid secret longing to induce attacks
of my own madness to enjoy the awful exaltation, the triumph of
destruction. I was not ashamed. I found myself entirely without
scruple, without conscience, incapable of remorse. When the periods of
desire were upon me, I hesitated at nothing to gratify them. At first
they were frequent sometimes there were only a few days between but as
I grew older the intervals lengthened, until sometimes I dared to think
myself free. But, sooner or later, it came again. I knew all the warning
signals the creeping in of uncontrollable thoughts the brain
pictures the quickening of mind and body then the grip of the madness.
All I could do at such times was to collect a number of things
sufficiently beautiful to satisfy my lust, and lock myself in to an orgy
of destruction. Then I was normal again for another period. So I grew
up. When I was twenty, I learnt the truth.
I told him, a woman s broken voice said. I hadn t the heart to tell
him before. I was hoping against hope that the curse would pass away as
he grew into manhood. But when I saw that it would not ... I told him.
Then I knew there was no escape, the dull voice went on. The results
of my father s vices and my mother s madness were my inheritance.
God! ... what a legacy!
The voice flamed for an instant then subsided again into its previous
monotony.
The intervals became longer and longer, but each time the madness
recurred it tightened its clutches. Each time it made me more and more
its own property. Whenever the warnings showed themselves I fled to the
refuge of Miss Masters s house. She bought and kept there things on
which, when the mania was at its height, it satisfied me to expend my
lust. But those inanimate things, though sufficient for that purpose,
had no power in themselves to produce an attack of the madness. The
capability to do that was reserved to a woman s beauty the effect of
which, so far, I had had no opportunity to experience. That opportunity
came to me for the first time at Nice twenty years ago. I had never
seen a really beautiful woman before I saw Colette d Orsel.
Another pause followed the name. The room behind the curtains remained
in tense silence until the voice resumed.
I can remember it now as if it were yesterday. How she stood
there in the soft shaded light terribly beautiful. And I the
Destroyer watched her paralyzed knowing for the first time the
pinnacle of my madness. The sight of her numbed all my sanity. I could
no more have torn myself away from that place than I could have resisted
the new flood of my disease that broke over me like a nightmare wave. I
was introduced to her. As I bent over her hand I almost laughed at the
thought of what her horror would have been if she had known the impulses
that surged through me. Her voice the touch of her burnt into me like
flames. I knew what the end would be, but I was powerless in the grip of
my inheritance. And she in the pitiless irony of it liked me! Three
evenings later I met her in the gardens of the hotel. We sat together
... alone for the first time. I struggled. My God, I struggled! But it
was useless. The white shape of her next to me the dim outline of her
features the whole nearness of her beauty.... Then it came on me, as I
knew it would the final rush of irresistible hatred. When I knew myself
again ... she was lying on the ground ... smashed ... my first living
victim.
The woman sobbed.
God forgive him! she cried. He was innocent himself. It wasn t really
him....
Light footsteps moved across the floor.
Let me be, said the voice hardly. What God does with me is for God to
do. Sit down again.
The footsteps returned.
I left her there, and went back to the hotel. I sat down in my room,
and analyzed my feelings. The madness had left me. My mind was perfectly
clear and steady. I felt no horror at what I had done no remorse only
a sense of impersonal regret at the death of an innocent woman, and a
faint detached pity for her misfortune in crossing my path. I carefully
considered my position, and certainty that there could be no evidence
against me dispelled any fears for myself but my cold blooded sanity
realized that the odds were tremendously against a recurrence of the
same good fortune, and that the avoidance of the opposite sex must
become the chief care of my life. Then I went to bed, and slept
soundly. The discovery of Colette d Orsel s body early the next morning
provided the sensation of the year at Nice. The police were confounded.
There was no motive no clue. It is an unsolved mystery to day.
The callousness of the story was so revolting that even the inspector,
seasoned as he was, allowed a muttered expression of disgust to escape
him. But Monsieur Dupont remained as silent and still as the house
itself.
Ten years later, continued the voice, I went to America. For five
years I had been free from any return of the madness. You can imagine
the longing to be like other men to presume on the years of immunity. I
felt unshakably sane. I even felt that I had never been mad. I gloried
in the keenness of my intellect, the absolute order and control of my
thoughts. What had I to do with madness? But in Boston ... I saw
Margaret McCall. In an instant I was mad. In an instant
A cry tore the air a cry so awful in its inhuman fury that the two
listeners shrank back horrified. For a moment the room seethed with
confusion. The voices of men and women were blended in rage, terror, and
command. Then the curtains were wrenched aside, and two figures rushed
out shrieking into the darkness of the garden.
CHAPTER XXXII
THE BEAUTY KILLER
Four more figures dashed out through the curtains two women and two
men. The inspector and Monsieur Dupont joined them. Guided by the sounds
in front of them, they dashed across the garden at the top of their
speed.
A black wall of earth loomed up before them, like the rising of a
gigantic wave. It was strongly rivetted, and must have been at least ten
feet high. It was quite inaccessible from where the pursuers stopped
beneath it.
Look! Look! a woman screamed.
They looked up.
My God! the inspector exclaimed.
On the height above them, silhouetted against the pale sky of the summer
night, they saw a figure its arms uplifted in an attitude of majesty,
of triumphant defiance. The white light of the moon lit up a face
terrible beyond words in its pride, its sin, and its utter madness.
I am the Beauty Killer! I killed Colette d Orsel! I killed Margaret
McCall. I killed Christine Manderson....
Another figure scrambled up out of the darkness on to the height, and
the silver head of Oscar Winslowe gleamed in the light. For a moment he
crouched then sprang forward with a yell. The two figures swayed
backwards in a fierce struggle.
They will go down! a man s voice cried. It is the edge of a gravel
pit. The fence will not bear. There is a sheer drop of fifty feet.
Let them go, another woman sobbed. It is the best way.
And, even as she spoke, there was the sound of tearing woodwork. The
struggling figures stood out for an instant with startling
clearness then disappeared like the sudden shutting off of a moving
picture. And the whole night seemed to wince at the thud that followed.
We must go down, the man s voice said, breaking the silence in an
awestruck whisper. There is a way round the other side.
They followed him round the edge of the pit. It seemed like walking
round the world. They descended a steep slope and then, in the vast
gray silence, a circle of pale faces surrounded the dead bodies of Oscar
Winslowe, and John Tranter.
CHAPTER XXXIII
LAST TRUTHS
My friends, said Monsieur Dupont, you have already heard a great part
of the story. John Tranter was the son of Oscar Winslowe. He was mad. He
was, as he called himself truly, a Beauty Killer. That strange lust he
inherited from his mother, who had been robbed of all she cared for, and
hoped for, in life by a beautiful woman, and rendered insane three
months before his birth. It was a most pathetic tragedy. We shall now
hear
One moment, Inspector Fay interrupted. As I represent the police
here, I should be glad to know, before we go any further, whose house I
am in.
Pardon me, Monsieur Dupont apologized. I had forgotten. You are in
the house of Doctor Lessing, he inclined himself towards the doctor,
who will in due course repeat to you a statement which he made to me
yesterday. This lady is Miss Masters, who was Tranter s nurse. Mrs.
Astley Rolfe and Mr. Copplestone which, I fancy, is not his correct
name you know already.
He added a high compliment to the inspector s present position and past
achievements, and then turned to Copplestone.
Mr. Copplestone, when Tranter did not return to me at the appointed
time this afternoon, I went to your house. I found great changes. I
found it, as you say, upside down.
Copplestone was radiant with happiness. Every trace of the old gloom had
left him. He was a new man.
I should think you did! he retorted. And you d have found the earth
upside down as well, if I d been able to turn it.
I was puzzled, Monsieur Dupont admitted. I could not understand it.
But I knew this that when the shadows roll away from a man s house,
they roll away from his life. When he draws the blinds and throws open
the windows of his house to the light and the air, he draws the blinds
and throws open the windows of his soul. When he straightens his garden,
he straightens himself. I knew that before you would lift the cloud from
your house something must have lifted the cloud from you. You had been
delivered
There was a fellow in the Bible, said Copplestone I think he was a
king who was cured of leprosy by taking a dip in a river. I don t know
what happened afterwards, but I am quite sure that he turned his palace
upside down when he got back.
He sprang up, his face illuminated with all the wonder of his new birth.
I am free! he cried. Free! That s what my house told you. I had been
brought out into the light after half a life of darkness. I had been
released after forty years of prison, of torment that all the tortures
of the Inquisition at once couldn t have equalled!
He stared about him, like an intoxicated man.
This room is too small! he almost shouted. Everything is too small. I
want to dance on the Universe. I want the world to be a football. I want
to play enormous games with giants He checked himself abruptly, and
sat down. Forgive me, he said. You would understand, if you knew what
I have suffered.
I can, for one, agreed the doctor heartily.
And I, indeed, said Monsieur Dupont. But to proceed with the story I
think it would be better to commence with what Miss Masters has to tell
us.
He bowed to a gray haired, grief stricken woman. There was a pause
before she overcame her emotion sufficiently to speak.
I took charge of Mary Winslowe s child from its birth, she began, at
last. She entrusted it to me in her sane moments, and I kept my trust
faithfully. Perhaps it would have been better if I had not.
You did your duty, the doctor said.
It was a condition that he should never come under his father s
influence, or even know his real name. He was to be kept in complete
ignorance of the tragedy of his birth. It was necessary for him to be
christened in his proper name to legalize the inheritance of his
mother s fortune, but after that I took him away, and brought him up in
strict accordance with my promises. He was told that both his parents
had been drowned at sea. I gave him the name of John Tranter Tranter
was an old family name of mine. He was a bonny little fellow. I never
thought that he might have inherited his mother s madness.
The Laws of Nature are inexorable, said the doctor. If only the
Second Commandment were given to people as the Law of Nature instead of
the threat of God, it would be of some value.
I hardly realized it, she went on, even when the symptoms had
unmistakably developed. But it increased too plainly to be denied. I
hoped and prayed that the horrible disease would pass away from him as
he grew up but it grew stronger and stronger with him. At last he made
me tell him what it really was. It was against my promise, but he had to
know. I pledged my word that I would keep his secret, and it was
arranged that whenever he felt the approach of an attack he would come
to me. I kept things for him. At first smaller things satisfied him. He
was content to destroy flowers, pictures, prettily colored china,
anything that was beautiful. But after that visit to France, when he was
twenty, there was a change. He never told me what had happened that he
had killed a woman but from that time only a woman s beauty would
satisfy him. The attacks became few and far between, but when they came
he would have died with the very force of his madness if he had not had
some representation of a beautiful woman to expend it on.
It s frightful incredible, the inspector exclaimed.
It was all the more pitiful, she said, because his sanity was so
wonderful. He had a towering intellect. He succeeded in anything he put
his hand to.
He was looked upon as one of the greatest authorities on finance in the
country, said the inspector.
He could have been a Member of Parliament before he was thirty if he
had cared for politics. He refused a title. To be a Privy Councillor was
the only honor he accepted. And he one of England s great men came to
my little house at Streatham to gratify his madness to destroy.
She looked round at them defiantly, anger displacing the sorrow on her
face.
But he was not guilty, she declared. His hands may have killed those
three women but he was not guilty. Nor was that poor innocent woman,
his mother, who died in the madhouse. They were both clean of sin. It
was on his wicked father that the guilt lay. It was Oscar Winslowe who
was responsible for the lives that have fallen to his sins. Oscar
Winslowe, and no one else.
I bear witness to that, agreed Doctor Lessing. Mary Winslowe was the
gentlest, the sweetest, and the most patient woman that ever walked this
earth, as you will see when I tell you my story. And he was the biggest
blackguard that ever blasphemed the likeness of his Maker.
It is true, said the woman.
She drew back in her chair, and pressed a hand to her forehead.
That is all I have to tell you, she concluded.
Last night, said Monsieur Dupont, I called at your house, and was
told by the lady who lives next door that you had left in a hurry two
hours before.
Yes, she said.
I presume that you did so on instructions from Tranter?
Yes.
Evidently he shadowed me to Paddington Station, as I expected he would,
and decided to remove you in case I should get on the right track.
He sent me an urgent message, she said, saying that a great disaster
hung over his head, and that I must go away without leaving any trace.
He told me where to go, and promised to come to me and explain.
He knew that it was only you who could give any proof against him?
After forty years, she returned, with a touch of bitterness, he ought
to have known that I should not betray him.
Even if one had told you of those three dreadful crimes that he had
committed, and that an innocent man was accused of the last one?
She locked her hands together.
Don t ask me, she cried. I don t know what I should have done.
He foresaw that problem, said Monsieur Dupont. His sanity was, as you
have said, wonderful. But the sanity of madness is always
wonderful that is why madmen are such superb criminals. It is only a
madman who can be really sane. Although I allowed him to see that I knew
already something of the truth, he never betrayed himself by even a
tremor. He had all the grand egotism of the born criminal. His disguise
was impenetrable. He was never sure how far my knowledge went, but not a
sign of anxiety did he ever show. We played a game of cross purposes. I
used him, under the pretense of requiring his assistance, to keep him by
my side, and in the hope that as he saw me draw nearer to him step by
step, he would break down. He, on his side, allowed himself to be used
in order to keep watch on my moves, and safeguard himself against them,
as he did in the case of Miss Masters. He dared not leave me. In all my
conversations with him, I placed him more and more at his wit s end to
know how much I really knew. As much from curiosity as from anything, I
instructed him to discover the secret of Mr. Copplestone s house, for I
was convinced that it did contain an interesting secret. He was quite
willing to make the attempt. It did not promise to lead me any nearer to
him. He little thought when he went and I had little thought when I
sent him that he was going to his own undoing.
And my salvation, Copplestone added.
There, said Monsieur Dupont, it passes to you to enlighten me.
First, returned Copplestone, I should like to know what caused you to
be so positive, after being in my house only two or three hours, that
there was a secret in it.
My instinct for the mysterious is seldom at fault, said Monsieur
Dupont. Have you not observed how, by their characters, their habits,
and their desires, human beings draw to themselves certain events and
conditions of life? And it is equally true that houses draw to
themselves certain contents and certain kinds of inhabitants. If a house
is particularly adapted to contain a secret, in the course of time will
certainly contain one. By a few strokes of his pencil an architect can
condemn a house to become the scene of a murder, as surely as he can
make it a convenient or inconvenient dwelling. Your house was
constructed to hide a secret. And I was not only sure that it did hide
one, but that it hid one which was in some way connected with the crime
in the garden.
I have had some experience of that instinct of yours, the inspector
remarked, with a somewhat rueful smile.
Well, said Copplestone, instinct or no instinct, it certainly did
hide a secret, and that secret was that Oscar Winslowe lived in it if
his condition could be called living. For the last five years he had
been practically a helpless imbecile. He seldom uttered a sound beyond a
gibber, and hardly seemed to be conscious. He was suffering the natural
consequences of his vices. He had been gradually reaching that
condition since nature had dealt him her first stroke of vengeance more
than thirty years ago. One by one his faculties had rotted. He was a
living mass of decay.
It was a sure thing, the doctor said. Such a condition was bound to
come. I prophesied it to his face when I first knew him.
That was the secret of my house, Copplestone proceeded. My own secret
was that I believed myself to be his son the inheritor of the curse
that really belonged to Tranter. And the horror of it, the helplessness,
the constant contemplation of the awful state of the man I knew as my
father, and the morbid certainty that sooner or later I must come to the
same state, actually drove me to the madness that was not really in me
at all.
But how had you come to believe yourself to be his son? the inspector
asked.
That was the last of Winslowe s diabolical acts. He inherited a large
fortune on condition that a child of his, to whom it could succeed, was
alive at the time of the testator s death. He did not know anything of
his own child, and did not want to. He was afraid that if he made
public inquiries for it, he might learn publicly that it was dead, and
lose his claim. Also, he was afraid of other complications and
exposures.
And with good reason, said the doctor grimly.
He wanted a child of five to produce as his son, George Copplestone
Winslowe and possibly make away with in due course after the business
was settled. I am quite sure that would have been my fate if nature had
not come to my rescue by striking him. He knew, from his knowledge of
the underworld of London, how such things could be arranged without
risk. No doubt he bought me for a few pounds. I am not the first heir to
an estate who has been produced by such means.
True enough, agreed the inspector. The heir to a million has been
bought for a fiver.
But a few years after taking possession of the fortune, he was struck
down, as I have said, by the first instalment of nature s retribution,
and was incapable of carrying out his plans. No one cared for me. No one
thought of removing me from the sight and influence of his growing
imbecility. I was brought up under the shadow of it. And so the horror
was born in me the belief that I was mad. What chance had I to resist
it, in those surroundings? When I came to an age to do so, I searched
out the story of my birth, of my father s excesses and my mother s
madness, and my doom crashed upon me. Can you wonder that I became what
I was?
No, indeed, said Monsieur Dupont.
I dropped the name of Winslowe. It was loathsome to me. I used my other
two names, George Copplestone. They, at least, had come from my mother s
side. My old manservant and his wife stuck to me, and kept my secrets.
The income devolved on me in consequence of Winslowe s incapability. And
so things went on. In my morbid demoralization I saw myself growing
nearer and nearer to that wretched creature day by day.
Dreadful! shuddered the doctor. It must have been a living hell.
Then, last night, Tranter came. He climbed up on the ivy, and tried to
spy into Winslowe s room. But I was there, and heard him. I dragged him
in through the window. I suppose it was some look, some likeness to his
mother, that stirred Winslowe s memory. He recognized him, and a flash
of sanity came back to him. Under that sudden mental stimulation he
recovered his power of movement, and was able to confess at least a part
of the truth. Tranter was taken off his guard, and I forced him to admit
his madness. I compelled him to take Winslowe and myself to Miss
Masters, and she, in her turn, brought us here.
I imagined she would, Monsieur Dupont remarked.
Copplestone drew a deep breath, and laughed aloud.
And I am like other men! I can live as other men live. I can do what
other men do. I can His eyes rested on the woman beside him, and
his face grew tender. Yes, he repeated slowly, I can ... I can....
There was a pause.
And it was Tranter who killed Christine Manderson.... the inspector
said, almost to himself.
It was, said Monsieur Dupont. He admitted to you on the night of the
crime that he had known her in America years ago. And here we have a
curious study in conflicting emotions. When he first met her, he had
already killed two beautiful women. She was certainly more beautiful
than either yet he was able to associate with her on intimate terms for
a considerable time, and even to tear himself away from her at last,
without adding her to the victims of his madness. How was he able to do
that? It was undoubtedly because he loved her. He had not loved either
of the other two, so there had been no opposing emotion to his mania.
But he loved Christine Manderson, and love was capable of holding the
madness in check, because love, in its full strength, is the strongest
of all human emotions. Love is stronger than madness, and ten times
stronger than sanity. But after he left her the love faded to a certain
extent, while the madness increased. Therefore, when he was suddenly
confronted with her extraordinary beauty a few nights ago, the love that
had faded was unable to restrain the madness that had not. And he killed
her.
My God! exclaimed Copplestone, to think that he stood there with us
over the body he had torn and even lifted it into my arms without so
much as a quiver.
He was not capable of remorse or regret, Monsieur Dupont returned. If
he had been, he would have killed himself long ago. He paused. There
remain now a few points of my own part in this affair to tell you, and
we will then ask the doctor for his statement.
Before you do that, said Doctor Lessing, bluntly, I, for one, am
curious to know who you really are, and how you came to take such a
large hand in the whole business.
My connection with the whole business, replied Monsieur Dupont, is a
long story. I have already told it to Inspector Fay, and I will tell it
again with pleasure when all the more important statements have been
made. As regards myself
Inspector Fay took upon himself the continuation of the sentence.
Up to a few years ago, he said, Monsieur Dupont was, under a certain
pseudonym, the most brilliant member of the French Secret Service and
was, in fact, admitted to have no equal in the whole of Europe.
A gross exaggeration, my friends, protested Monsieur Dupont. He waved
the inspector to silence. When I came to London last week, he told
them, I came knowing that John Tranter had killed two women. I had
known that when I returned from America six months before. You can
imagine the difficulties in front of me then. I was to prove that an
English Privy Councillor, a well known and highly respected man, was in
reality a madman who was responsible for two of the most dreadful crimes
that had ever been committed. I had never seen him, but fortunately he
was in Paris at that time, and I had no difficulty in making his
acquaintance. By extreme good fortune, I was able to render him a
service in the streets which placed him under an obligation to me. I
observed him carefully, only to find him to all appearances the sanest
and most level headed man I had ever met. But there was one thing he
shut himself away completely from the society of women, and he avoided
all places where beauty was to be found in any form. But I was so far
from any proof. My next step was to test my own belief that his madness
was an inherent disease, and to do that I employed inquiry agents in
this country to discover whether there were any records of such a case
in existence. It is only two weeks since I received information from
them that a woman named Mary Winslowe had died in an asylum from that
very kind of madness, forty years ago.
That is true, corroborated the doctor.
I came to London immediately. While following up my clues, I renewed my
acquaintance with Tranter, and pressed him to act as my cicerone in
London society, hoping to be able to entrap him into a situation that
would lead him to betray himself. And he took me to Richmond. What
happened there, you know. Though he knew when Christine Manderson first
came into the room what the outcome would be, he was unable to tear
himself away. And in the garden she forced herself upon him. He tried to
resist her, but his madness overcame him. That is the explanation of
the absence of a cry for help, which once I stated to be the key to the
mystery. If she had been walking along that path to the house, she would
have had time to cry out, no matter how quickly the assailant had sprung
out at her. But she did not utter a cry because she was already in the
arms of the assailant, compelling him to a passionate embrace, and
without doubt it was a simple thing to strangle her silently in that
very position.
Good God! Copplestone shuddered.
His account of how she had asked him to find Mr. Copplestone, and tell
him she was not well, and of how he had left her on her way to the
house, was a succession of ingenious lies which could not be disproved.
That is my story, concluded Monsieur Dupont. The next most important
point at the moment is that James Layton is cleared of a charge from
which he could not possibly have saved himself.
Layton will be released with full honors to morrow, the inspector
said.
And I think, added Monsieur Dupont, that there will be another
matter not unconnected with a young lady named Jenny West upon which
we shall have to congratulate him and with very good reason.
CHAPTER XXXIV
CONCLUSION
Half an hour later, when the doctor s statement had been made,
Copplestone and Mrs. Astley Rolfe stood together in the flower laden
garden.
My dear, said the new man, I brought you here to witness my
deliverance. Yesterday, when you had left me, I made up my mind to put
an end to my life. To day I am free. The cloud has rolled away. I am fit
to keep my promise if you wish it kept.
She smiled up at him through happy tears.
If I wish it kept! she whispered.
By Jove! Copplestone exclaimed, I believe in every miracle that has
ever been reported, suggested, or hinted at, from the first hour of the
world!
